Acts 1:1

i

Acts 1:11

Acts
1 The former book I wrote,

Theophilus, told
all that Jesus began to do and to teach, 2 until
the day that he was taken up, after he had
given commands through the Holy Spirit to the
apostles he had chosen. 3 After his suffering,
he presented himself alive to them with many
convincing proofs. For forty days he appeared to
them, and he spoke about the kingdom of God.
4 When he was meeting together with them, he
commanded them not to leave Jerusalem, but to
wait for the promise of the Father, about which,
he said, “You heard from me 5 that John indeed
baptized with water, but you shall be baptized in
the Holy Spirit in a few days.”
6 When they were assembled together they
asked him, “Lord, is this the time you will restore
the kingdom to Israel?” 7 He said to them, “It
is not for you to know the times or the seasons
which the Father has determined by his own
authority. 8 But you will receive power, when the
Holy Spirit comes upon you, and you will be my
witnesses both in Jerusalem and in all Judea and
Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.” 9 When
the Lord Jesus had said these things, as they were
looking up, he was raised up, and a cloud hid
him from their eyes. 10 While they were looking
intensely to heaven as he went, suddenly, two
men stood by them in white clothing. 11 They
said, “You men of Galilee, why do you stand

Acts 1:12

ii

Acts 1:20

here looking into heaven? This Jesus who has
been taken up from you into heaven, will return
in the same manner as you saw him going into
heaven.”
12 Then they returned to Jerusalem from the
Mount of Olives, which is near to Jerusalem, a
Sabbath day's journey. 13 When they arrived,
they went up into the upper chamber, where
they were staying.
They were Peter, John,
James, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew,
Matthew, James son of Alphaeus, Simon the
Zealot, and Judas son of James. 14 They were
all united as one, as they diligently continued
in prayer. Included were the women, Mary the
mother of Jesus, and his brothers.
15 In those days Peter stood up in the midst
of the brothers, about 120 people, and said,
16 “Brothers, it was necessary that the scripture
should be fulfilled, that the Holy Spirit spoke
before by the mouth of David concerning Judas,
who guided the ones who arrested Jesus. 17 For
he was one of us and received his share of the
benefits of this ministry.” 18 (Now this man
bought a field with the earnings he received for
his wickedness, and there he fell headfirst, and
his body burst open, and all his intestines poured
out. 19 All those living in Jerusalem heard about
this, so they called that field in their language
“Akeldama,” that is, “Field of Blood.”) 20 “For it
is written in the Book of Psalms,
'Let his field be made desolate,
and do not let even one person live there';
'Let someone else take his position of leadership.'

Acts 1:21

iii

Acts 2:7

21 It is necessary, therefore, that one of the men

who accompanied us all the time the Lord Jesus
went in and out among us, 22 beginning from the
baptism of John to the day that he was taken
up from us, must be a witness with us of his
resurrection.” 23 They put forward two men,
Joseph called Barsabbas, who was also named
Justus, and Matthias. 24 They prayed and said,
“You, Lord, know the hearts of all people, so
reveal which of these two is the one whom you
have chosen 25 to take the place in this ministry
and apostleship from which Judas turned away
to go to his own place.” 26 They cast lots for
them, and the lot fell to Matthias, and he was
numbered with the eleven apostles.

2

1 When the day of Pentecost came, they were
all together in the same place. 2 Suddenly there

came from heaven a sound like the rush of a
violent wind, and it filled the whole house where
they were sitting. 3 There appeared to them
tongues like fire that were distributed, and they
sat upon each one of them. 4 They were all filled
with the Holy Spirit and began to speak with
other languages, as the Spirit gave them to speak.
5 Now there were Jews who were living in
Jerusalem, godly men, from every nation under
heaven. 6 When this sound was heard, the
multitude came together and was confused because everyone heard them speaking in his own
language. 7 They were amazed and marveled;
they said, “Really, are not all these who are

Acts 2:8

iv

Acts 2:20

speaking Galileans? 8 Why is it that we are
hearing them, each in our own language in
which we were born? 9 Parthians and Medes and
Elamites, and those who live in Mesopotamia,
in Judea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia,
10 Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and the parts
of Libya toward Cyrene, and visitors from Rome,
11 Jews and proselytes, Cretans and Arabians, we
hear them telling in our languages about the
mighty works of God.” 12 They were all amazed
and perplexed; they said to one another, “What
does this mean?” 13 But others mocked and said,
“They are full of new wine.”
14 But Peter stood with the eleven, raised his
voice, and said to them, “Men of Judea and all
of you who live at Jerusalem, let this be known
to you; pay attention to my words. 15 For these
people are not drunk as you assume, for it is only
the third hour of the day. 16 But this is what was
spoken through the prophet Joel:
17 'It will be in the last days,' God says,
'I will pour out my Spirit on all people.
Your sons and your daughters will prophesy,
your young men will see visions,
and your old men will dream dreams.
18 Also on my servants and my female servants
in those days
I will pour out my Spirit, and they will prophesy.
19 I will show wonders in the sky above
and signs on the earth below,
blood, fire, and vapor of smoke.
20 The sun will be turned to darkness
and the moon to blood,

Acts 2:21

v

Acts 2:31

before the great and remarkable day of the Lord
comes.
21 It will be that everyone who calls on the name
of the Lord will be saved.'
22 Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of
Nazareth, a man accredited to you by God by
the mighty deeds, the wonders, and the signs
which God did through him in your midst,
23 This man was
as you yourselves know.
handed over by God's predetermined plan and
foreknowledge; and you, by the hand of lawless
men, put him to death by nailing him to a cross.
24 But God raised him up, freeing him from the
pains of death, because it was impossible for him
to be held by it. 25 For David says about him,
'I saw the Lord always before my face,
for he is beside my right hand so that I should
not be moved.
26 Therefore my heart was glad and my tongue
rejoiced.
Also, my flesh will live in certain hope.
27 For you will not abandon my soul to Hades,
neither will you allow your Holy One to see
decay.
28 You revealed to me the ways of life;
you will make me full of gladness with your face.'
29 Brothers, I can speak to you confidently about
the patriarch David, he both died and was
buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
30 Therefore, he was a prophet and knew that
God had sworn with an oath to him, that he
would set one of the fruit of his body upon his
throne. 31 He saw what was to happen in the

Acts 2:32

vi

Acts 2:42

future and spoke about the resurrection of the
Christ,
'He was neither abandoned to Hades, nor did his
flesh see decay.'
32 This Jesus—God raised him up, of which we all
are witnesses. 33 Therefore having been exalted
to the right hand of God and having received
the promised Holy Spirit from the Father, he has
poured out what you see and hear.
34 For David did not ascend to the heaven, but he
says,
'The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand,
35 until I make your enemies the stool for your
feet.”'
36 Therefore, let all the house of Israel certainly
know that God has made him both Lord and
Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified.”
37 Now when they heard this, they were
pierced in their hearts, and said to Peter and
the rest of the apostles, “Brothers, what shall we
do?” 38 Then Peter said to them, “Repent and
be baptized, each of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you
will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. 39 For
the promise is to you and to your children and
to all that are far off, as many people as the
Lord our God will call.” 40 With many other
words he testified and urged them; he said, “Save
yourselves from this wicked generation.” 41 Then
they received his word and were baptized, and
there were added in that day about three thousand souls. 42 They continued in the apostles'

Acts 2:43

vii

Acts 3:8

teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread
and in prayers.
43 Fear came upon every soul, and many wonders and signs were done through the apostles.
44 All who believed were together and had all
things in common, 45 and they sold their property
and possessions and distributed them to all,
according to the needs anyone had. 46 So day
after day they continued with one purpose in
the temple, and they broke bread in homes, and
they shared food with glad and humble hearts,
47 praising God and having favor with all the
people, and every day the Lord added to their
number those who were being saved.

3

1 Now Peter and John were going up into the

temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.
2 Now a man lame from birth was being carried
every day to the Beautiful gate of temple, so he
could ask people who were going into the temple
for a gift of money. 3 When he saw Peter and
John about to enter the temple, he asked them
for a gift of money. 4 Peter, fastening his eyes
upon him, with John, said, “Look at us.” 5 The
lame man looked at them, expecting to receive
something from them. 6 But Peter said, “Silver
and gold I do not have, but what I do have, I
will give to you. In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, walk.” 7 Taking him by the right hand,
Peter raised him up, and immediately the man's
feet and ankle were made strong. 8 Leaping
up, the lame man stood and began to walk;

Acts 3:9

viii

Acts 3:19

and he entered with Peter and John into the
temple, walking, leaping, and praising God. 9 All
the people saw him walking and praising God.
10 They noticed that it was the man who had
been asking people for a gift of money at the
Beautiful Gate of the temple; and they were filled
with wonder and amazement because of what
had happened to him.
11 As he was holding on to Peter and John, all
the people ran together to them in the porch that
is called Solomon's, greatly marveling. 12 When
Peter saw this, he answered the people, “You
men of Israel, why do you marvel? Why do you
fix your eyes on us, as if we had made him to
walk by our own power or godliness? 13 The
God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob,
the God of our fathers, has glorified his servant
Jesus. He is the one whom you delivered up
and rejected before the face of Pilate, when he
had decided to release him. 14 You rejected the
Holy and Righteous One, and you asked instead
for a murderer to be released to you. 15 You
killed the Founder of life, whom God raised
from the dead—and we are witnesses of this.
16 Now, by faith in his name—this man whom
you see and know—this same name made him
strong. The faith that is through Jesus gave to
him this complete health in the presence of all
of you. 17 Now, brothers, I know that you acted
in ignorance, as did also your rulers. 18 But the
things which God foretold by the mouth of all
the prophets, that his Christ should suffer, he
has now fulfilled. 19 Repent, therefore, and turn,

Acts 3:20

ix

Acts 4:4

so that your sins may be blotted out, so that
there may come periods of refreshing from the
presence of the Lord; 20 and that he may send the
Christ who has been appointed for you, Jesus.
21 He is the One heaven must receive until the
time of the restoration of all things, about which
God spoke long ago by the mouth of his holy
prophets. 22 Moses indeed said, 'The Lord God
will raise up a prophet like me from among your
brothers. You shall listen to everything that he
will speak to you. 23 It will happen that every
person who does not listen to that prophet will
be completely destroyed from among the people.'
24 Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel and
those who came after him, they spoke out and
announced these days. 25 You are the sons of
the prophets and of the covenant that God made
with your ancestors, as he said to Abraham, 'In
your seed shall all the families of the earth be
blessed.' 26 After God raised up his servant, he
sent him to you first, in order to bless you by
turning every one of you from your wickedness.”
1 As

4

Peter and John were speaking to the
people, the priests and the captain of the temple
and the Sadducees came upon them. 2 They were
deeply troubled because Peter and John were
teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus
the resurrection from the dead. 3 They arrested
them and put them in jail until the next morning,
since it was now evening. 4 But many of the
people who had heard the message believed; and

Acts 4:5

x

Acts 4:16

the number of the men who believed was about
five thousand.
5 It came about on the next day that their
rulers, elders and scribes gathered together in
Jerusalem. 6 Annas the high priest was there,
and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and all
who were relatives of the high priest. 7 When
they had set Peter and John in their midst, they
asked them, “By what power, or in what name,
have you done this?” 8 Then Peter, filled with
the Holy Spirit, said to them, “You rulers of the
people, and elders, 9 if we this day are being
questioned concerning a good deed done to a sick
man, by what means was this man made well?
10 May this be known to you all and to all the
people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ
of Nazareth, whom you crucified, but whom God
raised from the dead, that this man stands here
before you healthy. 11 Jesus Christ is the stone
which you as builders despised but which has
been made the head cornerstone. 12 There is
no salvation in any other person, for there is no
other name under heaven given among men by
which we must be saved.”
13 Now when they saw the boldness of Peter
and John, and realized that they were ordinary,
uneducated men, they were surprised, becoming
aware that Peter and John had been with Jesus.
14 Because they saw the man who was healed
standing with them, they had nothing to say
against this. 15 But after they had commanded
the apostles to leave the council meeting, they
talked among themselves. 16 They said, “What

Acts 4:17

xi

Acts 4:26

shall we do to these men? For the fact that a
remarkable miracle has been done through them
is known to everyone who lives in Jerusalem; we
cannot deny it. 17 But in order that it spreads
no further among the people, let us warn them
not to speak anymore to anyone in this name.”
18 They called Peter and John in and commanded
them not to speak at all nor teach in the name
of Jesus. 19 But Peter and John answered and
said to them, “Whether it is right in the sight
of God to obey you rather than him, you judge.
20 We are not able to stop speaking about the
things we have seen and heard.” 21 After further
warning Peter and John, they let them go. They
were unable to find any excuse to punish them,
because all of the people were praising God for
what had been done. 22 The man who had
experienced this miracle of healing was more
than forty years old.
23 After they were set free, Peter and John came
to their own people and reported all that the
chief priests and the elders had said to them.
24 When they heard it, they raised their voices
together to God and said, “Lord, you made the
heavens and the earth and the sea, and all that is
in them. 25 You spoke by the Holy Spirit through
the mouth of your servant, our father David,
'Why did the Gentile nations rage,
and the peoples imagine useless things?'
26 You said,
'The kings of the earth set themselves together,
and the rulers gathered together
against the Lord, and against his Christ.'

Acts 4:27

xii

Acts 4:37

27 Indeed,

both Herod and Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles and the people of Israel,
gathered together in this city against your holy
servant Jesus, whom you anointed. 28 They
gathered together to do all that your hand and
your plan had decided in advance would happen.
29 Now, Lord, look upon their warnings and grant
to your servants to speak your word with all
boldness. 30 Stretch out your hand to heal, and
to give signs and wonders through the name of
your holy servant Jesus.” 31 When they finished
praying, the place where they were gathered
together was shaken, and they were all filled
with the Holy Spirit and they spoke the word of
God with boldness.
32 The

great number of those who believed
were of one heart and soul. No one said that
anything he possessed was his own, but they
had everything in common. 33 With great power
the apostles were proclaiming their testimony
about the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and
great grace was upon them all. 34 There was no
person among them who lacked anything, for all
who owned title to lands or houses sold them
and brought the money of the things that were
sold 35 and laid it at the apostles' feet, and it was
distributed to each one according to their need.
36 Joseph, a Levite, a man from Cyprus whom

the apostles called Barnabas (which means Son
of Encouragement), 37 sold a field and brought
the money and laid it at the apostles' feet.

Acts 5:1

1 Now

xiii

5

Acts 5:12

a certain man named Ananias, with
Sapphira his wife, sold a piece of property, 2 and
he kept back part of the sale money (his wife
also knew it), and brought the other part of it
and laid it at the apostles' feet. 3 But Peter said,
“Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to
the Holy Spirit and to keep back part of the price
of the land? 4 While it remained unsold, did it not
remain your own, and after it was sold, was it not
in your control? How is it that you thought of this
thing in your heart? You have not lied to men,
but to God.” 5 Hearing these words, Ananias fell
down and breathed his last, and great fear came
upon all who heard it. 6 The young men came
forward and wrapped him up, and they carried
him out and buried him.
7 After about three hours, his wife came in, not
knowing what had happened. 8 Peter said to her,
“Tell me whether you sold the land for so much.”
She said, “Yes, for so much.” 9 Then Peter said to
her, “How is it that you have agreed together to
test the Spirit of the Lord? Look, the feet of the
men who buried your husband are at the door,
and they will carry you out.” 10 She immediately
fell down at his feet and breathed her last. When
the young men came in, they found her dead,
and carried her out and buried her beside her
husband. 11 Great fear came upon the whole
church, and upon all who heard these things.
12 Many signs and wonders were taking place
among the people through the hands of the
apostles. They were all together in Solomon's

Acts 5:13

xiv

Acts 5:25

Porch. 13 But no one else had the courage to join
them; however, they were held in high esteem
by the people. 14 Still more believers were
being added to the Lord, multitudes of men and
women, 15 so that they even carried the sick into
the streets and laid them on beds and couches,
so that as Peter came by, his shadow might fall
on some of them. 16 There also came together a
great number of people from the towns around
Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those afflicted
with unclean spirits, and they were all healed.
17 But the high priest rose up, and all those
who were with him (which is the sect of the
Sadducees); and they were filled with jealousy
18 and laid hands on the apostles, and put them
in the public jail. 19 Yet during the night an angel
of the Lord opened the doors of the jail and led
them out, and said, 20 “Go, stand in the temple
and speak to the people all the words of this
life.” 21 When they heard this, they entered into
the temple about daybreak and taught. But the
high priest came, and those who were with him,
and called the council together, all the elders
of the people of Israel, and sent to the jail to
have the apostles brought. 22 But the officers
that went did not find them in the prison, and
they returned and reported, 23 “We found the
jail securely shut and the guards standing at the
door, but when we had opened it, we found no
one inside.” 24 Now when the captain of the
temple and the chief priests heard these words,
they were much perplexed concerning them as
to what would come of it. 25 Then someone came

Acts 5:26

xv

Acts 5:37

and told them, “The men whom you put in the
jail are standing in the temple and teaching the
people.” 26 So the captain went with the officers,
and brought them back, but without violence, for
they feared that the people might stone them.
27 When they had brought them, they set them
before the council. The high priest interrogated
them, 28 saying, “We strictly charged you not
to teach in this name, and yet, you have filled
Jerusalem with your teaching, and desire to
bring this man's blood upon us.” 29 But Peter
and the apostles answered, “We must obey God
rather than men. 30 The God of our fathers raised
up Jesus, whom you killed by hanging him on a
tree. 31 God exalted him to his right hand to be a
prince and a savior, to give repentance to Israel,
and forgiveness of sins. 32 We are witnesses of
these things, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God
has given to those who obey him.”
33 When the council members heard this, they
were furious and wanted to kill the apostles.
34 But a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of
the law, who was honored by all the people,
stood up and commanded the apostles to be
taken outside for a little while. 35 Then he said
to them, “Men of Israel, pay close attention to
what you propose to do with these people. 36 For
some time ago, Theudas rose up claiming to be
somebody, and a number of men, about four
hundred, joined him. He was killed, and all who
had been obeying him were scattered and came
to nothing. 37 After this man, Judas of Galilee
rose up in the days of the census and drew away

Acts 5:38

xvi

Acts 6:5

some people after him. He also perished, and
all who had been obeying him were scattered.
38 Now I say to you, keep away from these men
and let them alone, for if this plan or work is
of men, it will be overthrown. 39 But if it is of
God, you will not be able to overthrow them; you
may even find that you are fighting against God.”
So they were persuaded. 40 Then they called the
apostles in and beat them and commanded them
not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them
go. 41 They left the council rejoicing that they
were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the
Name. 42 Thereafter every day, in the temple
and from house to house, they were continuously
teaching and proclaiming Jesus as the Christ.
1 Now

6

in these days, when the number of
the disciples was multiplying, a complaint by
the Grecian Jews began against the Hebrews,
because their widows were being overlooked
in the daily distribution of food. 2 The twelve
called the multitude of the disciples to them
and said, “It is not right for us to give up the
word of God in order to serve tables. 3 You
should therefore choose, brothers, seven men
from among yourselves, men of good reputation,
full of the Spirit and of wisdom, whom we
may appoint over this business. 4 As for us,
we will always continue in prayer and in the
ministry of the word.” 5 Their speech pleased
the whole multitude. So they chose Stephen,
a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and

Acts 6:6

xvii

Acts 6:15

Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas,
and Nicolaus, a proselyte from Antioch. 6 The
believers brought these men before the apostles,
who prayed and then placed their hands upon
them.
7 So the word of God continued to spread, and

the number of disciples in Jerusalem increased
greatly, and a large number of the priests became
obedient to the faith.
8 Now Stephen, full of grace and power, was

doing great wonders and signs among the people. 9 But there arose some people who belonged
to the synagogue called the synagogue of the
Freedmen, of the Cyrenians and Alexandrians,
and some from Cilicia and Asia. These people
were debating with Stephen. 10 But they were not
able to stand against the wisdom and the Spirit
with which Stephen spoke. 11 Then they bribed
some men to say, “We have heard Stephen speak
blasphemous words against Moses and against
God.” 12 They stirred up the people, the elders,
and the scribes, and they approached Stephen
and seized him and brought him before the
council. 13 They brought false witnesses, who
said, “This man does not stop speaking words
against this holy place and the law. 14 For we
have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth
will destroy this place and change the customs
that Moses handed down to us.” 15 Everyone who
sat in the council fixed their eyes on him and saw
his face was like the face of an angel.

Acts 7:1

xviii

Acts 7:10

7

1 The high priest said, “Are these things true?”

2 Stephen said,

“Brothers and fathers, listen to me: The God of
glory appeared to our father Abraham when he
was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran;
3 he said to him, 'Leave your land and your
relatives, and go into the land that I will show
you.' 4 Then he left the land of the Chaldeans
and lived in Haran; from there, after his father
died, God brought him into this land, where you
live now. 5 He gave none of it as an inheritance
to him, no, not even enough to set a foot on.
But he promised—even though Abraham had
no child yet—that he would give the land as a
possession to him and to his descendants after
him. 6 God was speaking to him like this, that his
descendants would live for a while in a foreign
land, and that the inhabitants there would bring
them into slavery and treat them badly for four
hundred years. 7 'But I will judge the nation that
they serve,' said God, 'and after that they will
come out and worship me in this place.' 8 Then
God gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision,
so Abraham became the father of Isaac and
circumcised him on the eighth day; Isaac became
the father of Jacob, and Jacob the father of the
twelve patriarchs. 9 Because the patriarchs were
jealous of Joseph, they sold him into Egypt; but
God was with him 10 and rescued him from all
his troubles. He gave Joseph favor and wisdom
in the presence of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who
had made him governor over Egypt and over

Acts 7:11

xix

Acts 7:24

all his household. 11 Now there came a famine
over all Egypt and Canaan, and great suffering,
and our fathers could find no food. 12 But when
Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he
sent out our fathers on their first trip. 13 On
their second trip Joseph made himself known to
his brothers, and Joseph's family became known
to Pharaoh. 14 Joseph sent his brothers back
to tell Jacob his father to come to Egypt, along
with all his relatives, seventy-five persons in all.
15 So Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died,
he and our fathers. 16 They were carried over
to Shechem and laid in the tomb that Abraham
had bought for a price in silver from the sons of
Hamor in Shechem. 17 As the time of the promise
approached, the promise that God had made
to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in
Egypt, 18 until there arose another king over
Egypt, a king who did not know about Joseph.
19 He deceived our people and forced our fathers
to expose their newborn infants so they would
not be kept alive. 20 At that time Moses was
born; he was very beautiful before God and
was nourished for three months in his father's
house. 21 When he was placed outside, Pharaoh's
daughter adopted him and raised him as her own
son. 22 Moses was educated in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians, and he was mighty in his words
and works. 23 But when he was about forty years
old, it came into his heart to visit his brothers,
the children of Israel. 24 Seeing an Israelite being
mistreated, Moses defended him and avenged
him who was oppressed by striking the Egyptian:

Acts 7:25

xx

Acts 7:36

25 he thought that his brothers would understand

that God by his hand was rescuing them, but
they did not understand. 26 On the next day he
came to some Israelites as they were quarreling;
he tried to put them at peace with each other;
he said, 'Men, you are brothers; why are you
hurting one another?' 27 But the one who had
wronged his neighbor pushed him away, and
said, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge over
us? 28 Would you like to kill me, as you killed
the Egyptian yesterday?' 29 Moses ran away after
hearing this; he became a foreigner in the land of
Midian, where he became the father of two sons.
30 When forty years were past, an angel appeared
to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a
flame of fire in a bush. 31 When Moses saw
the fire, he marveled at the sight; and as he
approached to look at it, there came a voice of
the Lord, saying, 32 'I am the God of your fathers,
the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob.'
Moses trembled and did not dare to look. 33 The
Lord said to him, 'Take off the sandals from your
feet, for the place where you are standing is holy
ground. 34 I have certainly seen the suffering
of my people who are in Egypt; I have heard
their groaning, and I have come down to rescue
them; now come, I will send you to Egypt.' 35 This
Moses whom they rejected, when they said, 'Who
made you a ruler and a judge?'—he was the one
whom God sent as both a ruler and deliverer.
God sent him by the hand of the angel who
appeared to Moses in the bush. 36 Moses led
them out of Egypt, after doing miracles and signs

Acts 7:37

xxi

Acts 7:45

in Egypt and at the Sea of Reeds, and in the
wilderness during forty years. 37 It is the same
Moses who said to the people of Israel, 'God will
raise up a prophet for you from among your
brothers, a prophet like me.' 38 This is the man
who was in the assembly in the wilderness with
the angel who had spoken to him on Mount Sinai.
This is the man who was with our fathers; this is
the man who received living words to give to us.
39 This is the man whom our fathers refused to
obey; they pushed him away from themselves,
and in their hearts they turned back to Egypt.
40 At that time they said to Aaron, 'Make us gods
who will lead us. As for this Moses, who led us
out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what
has happened to him.' 41 So they made a calf
in those days and brought a sacrifice to the idol,
and rejoiced because of the work of their hands.
42 But God turned and gave them up to worship
the stars in the sky, as it is written in the book of
the prophets,
'Did you offer to me slain beasts and sacrifices
for forty years in the wilderness, house of Israel?
43 You accepted the tabernacle of Molech
and the star of the god Rephan,
and the images that you made to worship them:
and I will carry you away beyond Babylon.'
44 Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness, just as God commanded
when he spoke to Moses, that he should make it
like the pattern that he had seen. 45 Later, our
fathers, under Joshua, received the tabernacle

Acts 7:46

xxii

Acts 7:56

and brought it with them when they took possession of the land. God took the land from the
nations and drove them out before the face of
our fathers. The tabernacle remained in the land
until the time of David, 46 who found favor in
the sight of God, and he asked if he might find
a dwelling place for the God of Jacob. 47 But
it was Solomon who built the house for God.
48 However, the Most High does not live in houses
made with hands, as the prophet says,
49 'Heaven is my throne, and the earth is the
footstool for my feet.
What kind of house can you build for me? says
the Lord,
or what is the place for my rest?
50 Did my hand not make all these things?'
51 You people who are stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the
Holy Spirit; you act just as your fathers acted.
52 Which of the prophets did your fathers not
persecute? They killed the prophets who appeared in advance of the coming of the Righteous
One; and you have now become the betrayers
and murderers of him also, 53 you people who
received the law that angels had established, but
you did not keep it.”
54 Now when the council members heard these
things, they were cut to the heart, and they
ground their teeth at Stephen. 55 But he, being
full of the Holy Spirit, looked up intently into
heaven and saw the glory of God; and he
saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
56 Stephen said, “Look, I see the heavens opened,

Acts 7:57

xxiii

Acts 8:7

and the Son of Man standing at the right hand
of God.” 57 At this the council members covered
their ears, and shouting out with a loud voice,
altogether they rushed at him. 58 They dragged
him out of the city where they began to stone
him, and the witnesses laid down their outer
clothing at the feet of a young man named Saul.
59 As they were stoning Stephen, he was calling
out to the Lord and saying, “Lord Jesus, receive
my spirit.” 60 He knelt down and called out with
a loud voice, “Lord, do not hold this sin against
them.” When he had said this, he fell asleep.

8

1 Saul was in agreement with his death.

So there began on that day a great persecution
against the church that was in Jerusalem; and the
believers were all scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles.
2 Devout men buried Stephen and made great
lamentation over him. 3 But Saul greatly harmed
the church; he went into house after house and
dragged out men and women, and put them into
prison.
4 Yet the believers who had been scattered
went about proclaiming the word. 5 Philip went
down to the city of Samaria and proclaimed to
them the Christ. 6 When multitudes of people
heard and saw the signs that Philip did, they paid
attention together to what he said. 7 Unclean
spirits came out of many who were possessed,
crying out with a loud voice, and many who were

Acts 8:8

xxiv

Acts 8:19

paralyzed and lame were healed. 8 So there was
much joy in that city.
9 But there was a certain man in the city named

Simon, who had earlier been practicing sorcery;
he used to astonish the people of Samaria, while
claiming that he was an important person. 10 All
the Samaritans, from the least to the greatest,
paid attention to him; they said, “This man is
that power of God which is called Great.” 11 They
listened to him, because he had astonished them
for a long time with his sorceries. 12 But when
they believed Philip as he proclaimed the good
news about the kingdom of God and the name
of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men
and women. 13 Even Simon himself believed,
and after he was baptized he stayed with Philip
constantly. When he saw signs and mighty deeds
taking place, he was amazed.
14 Now when the apostles in Jerusalem heard

that Samaria had received the word of God, they
sent to them Peter and John. 15 When they had
come down, they prayed for them, that they
might receive the Holy Spirit. 16 For until that
time, the Holy Spirit had not come upon any of
them; they had only been baptized into the name
of the Lord Jesus. 17 Then Peter and John placed
their hands on them, and they received the Holy
Spirit. 18 Now when Simon saw that the Holy
Spirit was given through the laying on of the
apostles' hands, he offered them money. 19 He
said, “Give me this power, too, that whoever I
place my hands on might receive the Holy Spirit.”

Acts 8:20

xxv

Acts 8:32

20 But Peter said to him, “May your silver perish

along with you, because you thought to obtain
the gift of God with money. 21 You have no part
or share in this matter, because your heart is
not right with God. 22 Therefore repent of this
wickedness of yours, and pray to the Lord, so that
he might perhaps forgive you for the intention of
your heart. 23 For I see that you are in the poison
of bitterness and in the bonds of sin.” 24 Simon
answered and said, “Pray to the Lord for me, so
that nothing you have said may happen to me.”
25 When they had testified and spoken the
word of the Lord, Peter and John returned
to Jerusalem, proclaiming the gospel to many
villages of the Samaritans.
26 Now an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip
and said, “Arise and go toward the south to the
road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.”
(This road is in a desert.) 27 He arose and went.
Behold, there was a man from Cush, a eunuch
of great authority under Candace, queen of the
Cushites. He was in charge of all her treasure.
He had come to Jerusalem to worship. 28 He
was returning and sitting in his chariot, and was
reading the prophet Isaiah. 29 The Spirit said to
Philip, “Go over and stay close to this chariot.”
30 So Philip ran to him, and heard him reading
Isaiah the prophet, and said, “Do you understand
what you are reading?” 31 The Cushite said,
“How can I, unless someone guides me?” He
begged Philip to come up into the chariot and
sit with him. 32 Now the passage of the scripture
which the Ethiopian was reading was this,

Acts 8:33

xxvi

Acts 9:2

“He was led like a sheep to the slaughter,
and like a lamb before his shearer is silent,
so he did not open his mouth.
33 In his humiliation justice was taken away from
him.
Who can fully describe his descendants?
For his life was taken from the earth.”
34 So the eunuch asked Philip, and said, “I beg
you, who is the prophet speaking about, himself,
or someone else?” 35 Philip began to speak, and
beginning with this scripture he proclaimed the
good news about Jesus to him. 36 As they went
on the road, they came to some water and the
eunuch said, “Look, there is water here. What
prevents me from being baptized?” 37 * 38 So the
Ethiopian commanded the chariot to stop. They
went down into the water, both Philip and the
eunuch, and Philip baptized him. 39 When they
came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord
took Philip away, and the eunuch saw him no
more, but went on his way rejoicing. 40 But Philip
appeared at Azotus and he went through that
region, proclaiming the gospel to all the cities
until he came to Caesarea.

9

But Saul, still speaking threats even of
murder against the disciples of the Lord, went
to the high priest 2 and asked him for letters
for the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he
1

* 8:37 The best ancient copies omit Acts 8:37, Philip said, “If you

believe with all your heart, you may be baptized.” The Ethiopian
answered, “I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God” .

Acts 9:3

xxvii

Acts 9:15

found any who belonged to the Way, whether
men or women, he might bring them bound to
Jerusalem. 3 As he was traveling, it happened
that as he came near to Damascus, suddenly
there shone all around him a light out of heaven;
4 and he fell upon the ground and heard a
voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you
persecuting me?” 5 Saul replied, “Who are you,
Lord?” The Lord said, “I am Jesus whom you are
persecuting; 6 but rise, enter into the city, and it
will be told you what you must do.” 7 The men
who traveled with Saul stood speechless, hearing
the voice, but seeing no one. 8 Saul arose from
the ground, and when he opened his eyes, he
could see nothing; so they led him by the hand
and brought him into Damascus. 9 For three days
he was without sight, and he neither ate nor
drank.
10 Now there was a disciple at Damascus
named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a
vision, “Ananias!” He said, “See, I am here,
Lord.” 11 The Lord said to him, “Arise, and
go to the street which is called Straight, and at
the house of Judas ask for a man from Tarsus
named Saul, for he is praying. 12 He has seen
in a vision a man named Ananias coming in
and laying his hands on him, so that he might
see again.” 13 But Ananias answered, “Lord,
I have heard from many about this man, how
much harm he has done to your holy people in
Jerusalem. 14 He has authority from the chief
priests to arrest everyone here who calls upon
your name.” 15 But the Lord said to him, “Go,

Acts 9:16

xxviii

Acts 9:26

for he is a chosen instrument of mine, to carry
my name before the Gentiles and kings and
the children of Israel; 16 for I will show him
how much he must suffer for the cause of my
name.” 17 So Ananias departed, and entered into
the house. Laying his hands on him, he said,
“Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, who appeared to
you on the road when you were coming, has
sent me so that you might receive your sight and
be filled with the Holy Spirit.” 18 Immediately
something like scales fell from Saul's eyes, and
he received his sight; he arose and was baptized;
19 and he ate and was strengthened.
He stayed with the disciples in Damascus for
several days. 20 Right away he proclaimed Jesus
in the synagogues, saying that he is the Son
of God. 21 All who heard him were amazed
and said, “Is not this the man who destroyed
those in Jerusalem who called on this name? He
has come here to take them bound to the chief
priests.” 22 But Saul became more and more
powerful, and he was causing distress among
the Jews who lived in Damascus by proving that
Jesus is the Christ.
23 After many days, the Jews planned together
to kill him. 24 But their plan became known to
Saul. They watched the gates day and night in
order to kill him. 25 But his disciples took him
by night and let him down through the wall,
lowering him in a basket.
26 When he had come to Jerusalem, Saul
attempted to join the disciples, but they were
all afraid of him, not believing that he was a

Acts 9:27

xxix

Acts 9:38

disciple. 27 But Barnabas took him and brought
him to the apostles, and he told them how Saul
had seen the Lord on the road and that the Lord
had spoken to him, and how at Damascus Saul
had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus. 28 He
met with them as they were coming in and going
out of Jerusalem. He spoke boldly in the name of
the Lord Jesus 29 and debated with the Grecian
Jews; but they kept trying to kill him. 30 When
the brothers learned of this, they brought him
down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus.
31 So then, the church throughout all Judea,
Galilee, and Samaria had peace and was built
up; and, walking in the fear of the Lord and
in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, the church
grew in numbers. 32 Now it came about that,
as Peter went throughout the whole region, he
came down also to the believers who lived in
the town of Lydda. 33 There he found a certain
man named Aeneas, who had been in his bed for
eight years, for he was paralyzed. 34 Peter said
to him, “Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you. Get up
and make your bed,” and right away he got up.
35 So everyone who lived in Lydda and in Sharon
saw the man and they turned to the Lord.
36 Now there was in Joppa a certain disciple
named Tabitha, which is translated as “Dorcas.”
This woman was full of good works and merciful
deeds that she did for the poor. 37 It came about
in those days that she fell sick and died; when
they had washed her, they laid her in an upper
room. 38 Since Lydda was near Joppa, and the
disciples had heard that Peter was there, they

Acts 9:39

xxx

Acts 10:5

sent two men to him, begging him, “Come to us
without delay.” 39 Peter arose and went with
them. When he had arrived, they brought him to
the upper room, and all the widows stood by him
weeping, showing him the coats and garments
that Dorcas had made while she had been with
them. 40 Peter put them all out of the room,
knelt down, and prayed; then, turning to the
body, he said, “Tabitha, arise.” Then she opened
her eyes, and seeing Peter she sat up. 41 Peter
then gave her his hand and lifted her up; and
when he called the believers and the widows,
he presented her alive to them. 42 This matter
became known throughout all Joppa, and many
people believed on the Lord. 43 It happened that
Peter stayed for many days in Joppa with a man
named Simon, a tanner.
1 Now

10

there was a certain man in the city
of Caesarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of
what was called the Italian Regiment. 2 He was
a devout man, one who worshiped God with all
his household; he gave much money to those in
need, and he constantly prayed to God. 3 About
the ninth hour of the day, he clearly saw in a
vision an angel of God coming to him. The angel
said to him, “Cornelius!” 4 Cornelius stared at the
angel and was very frightened and said, “What is
it, sir?” The angel said to him, “Your prayers and
your gifts to the poor have gone up as a memorial
offering into God's presence. 5 Now send men to
the city of Joppa to bring a man named Simon

Acts 10:6

xxxi

Acts 10:19

who is called Peter. 6 He is staying with a tanner
named Simon, whose house is by the seaside.”
7 When the angel who spoke to him had left,
Cornelius called two of his house servants, and
a devout soldier from among those who served
him. 8 Cornelius told them all that had happened
and sent them to Joppa.
9 Now on the next day at about the sixth
hour, as they were on their journey and were
approaching the city, Peter went up upon the
housetop to pray. 10 He then became hungry
and wanted something to eat, but while the
people were cooking some food, he was given a
vision, 11 and he saw the sky open and a certain
container descending, something like a large
sheet coming down to the earth, let down by its
four corners. 12 In it were all kinds of four-footed
animals and things that crawled on the earth,
and birds of the sky. 13 Then a voice spoke to
him: “Rise, Peter, kill and eat.” 14 But Peter said,
“Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything
that was defiled and unclean.” 15 But the voice
came to him again a second time: “What God has
cleansed, do not call it defiled.” 16 This happened
three times; then the container was immediately
taken back up into the sky.
17 Now while Peter was very confused about
what the vision that he had seen could mean,
behold, the men who were sent by Cornelius
stood before the gate, after they had asked their
way to the house. 18 They called out and asked
whether Simon, who was also called Peter, was
staying there. 19 While Peter was still thinking

Acts 10:20

xxxii

Acts 10:30

about the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Behold,
three men are looking for you. * 20 Arise and
go down and go with them. Do not hesitate to
go with them, because I have sent them.” 21 So
Peter went down to the men and said, “I am he
whom you are seeking. Why have you come?”
22 They said, “A centurion named Cornelius, a
righteous man and one who worships God, and
is well spoken of by all the nation of the Jews,
was told by a holy angel of God to send for you to
come to his house, so he could listen to a message
from you.” 23 So Peter invited them to come in
and stay with him.
On the next morning he got up and went
with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa
accompanied him. 24 On the following day they
came to Caesarea. Cornelius was waiting for
them; he had called together his relatives and
his close friends. 25 It came about that when
Peter entered, Cornelius met him and fell down
at his feet to worship him. 26 But Peter helped
him up, saying, “Stand up! I too am a man.”
27 While Peter was talking with him, he went in
and found many people gathered together. 28 He
said to them, “You yourselves know that it is
not lawful for a Jewish man to associate with or
to visit someone from another nation. But God
has shown me that I should not call any man
defiled or unclean. 29 That is why I came without
arguing, when I was sent for. So I ask you why
you sent for me.” 30 Cornelius said, “Four days
* 10:19 Some ancient copies have, two men are looking for you
or some men are looking for you .

Acts 10:31

xxxiii

Acts 10:39

ago at this very hour, I was praying at the ninth
hour in my house; and see, a man stood before
me in bright clothing. 31 He said, 'Cornelius, your
prayer has been heard by God, and your gifts to
the poor have reminded God about you. 32 So
send someone to Joppa, and call to you a man
named Simon who is called Peter. He is staying
in the house of a tanner named Simon, by the
seaside.' † 33 So at once I sent for you. You are
kind to have come. Now then, we are all here
present in the sight of God, to hear everything
that you have been instructed by the Lord to
say.” ‡ 34 Then Peter opened his mouth and said,
“Truly, I perceive that God does not take
anyone's side. 35 Instead, in every nation anyone
who worships and does righteous deeds is acceptable to him. 36 You know the message that he
sent to the people of Israel, when he announced
good news about peace through Jesus Christ, who
is Lord of all— 37 you yourselves know the events
that took place, which occurred throughout all
Judea, beginning in Galilee, after the baptism
that John announced; 38 the events concerning
Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed him with
the Holy Spirit and with power. He went about
doing good and healing all who were oppressed
by the devil, for God was with him. 39 We are
witnesses of all the things Jesus did, both in the
country of the Jews and in Jerusalem. They killed
† 10:32 Some ancient copies add: When he comes, he will speak
‡ 10:33 Instead of instructed by the Lord to say, some
to you .
ancient copies have, instructed by God to say .

Acts 10:40

xxxiv

Acts 11:2

him by hanging him on a tree, 40 but God raised
him up on the third day and caused him to be
seen, 41 not by all the people, but to the witnesses
who were chosen beforehand by God—by us who
ate and drank with him after he rose from the
dead. 42 He commanded us to proclaim to the
people and to testify that this is the one who has
been chosen by God to be the Judge of the living
and the dead. 43 It is to him that all the prophets
bear witness, so that everyone who believes in
him shall receive forgiveness of sins through his
name.”
44 While Peter was still saying these things, the
Holy Spirit fell on all of those who were listening
to his message. 45 The people who belonged to
the circumcision group of believers—all of those
who came with Peter—were amazed, because
the gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out also
on the Gentiles. 46 For they heard these Gentiles
speak in other languages and praising God. Then
Peter answered, 47 “Can anyone keep water from
these people so they should not be baptized,
these people who have received the Holy Spirit
as well as we?” 48 Then he commanded them to
be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then
they asked him to stay with them for several
days.
1 Now

11

the apostles and the brothers who
were in Judea heard that the Gentiles also had
received the word of God. 2 When Peter had
come up to Jerusalem, they who belonged to the

Acts 11:3

xxxv

Acts 11:16

circumcision group criticized him; 3 they said,
“You associated with uncircumcised men and
ate with them!” 4 But Peter started to explain
the matter to them in detail; he said, 5 I was
praying in the city of Joppa, and I had a vision
of a container coming down, like a large sheet
let down from heaven by its four corners. It
descended to me. 6 I gazed at it and I thought
about it. I saw the four-legged animals of earth,
wild beasts, creeping animals, and birds of the
sky. 7 Then I heard a voice say to me, “Get up,
Peter; kill and eat!” 8 I said, “Not so, Lord; for
nothing unholy or unclean has ever entered into
my mouth.” 9 But the voice answered again from
heaven, “What God has declared clean, do not
call unclean.” 10 This happened three times, and
then everything was taken back up into heaven
again. 11 Behold, right away there were three
men standing in front of the house where we
were; they had been sent from Caesarea to me.
12 The Spirit commanded me to go with them,
and that I should make no distinction regarding
them. These six brothers went with me, and
we went into the man's house. 13 He told us
how he had seen the angel standing in his house
and saying, “Send men to Joppa and bring back
Simon who is called Peter. 14 He will speak to
you a message by which you will be saved—you
and all your household.” 15 As I began to speak
to them, the Holy Spirit came on them, just as on
us in the beginning. 16 I remembered the words
of the Lord, how he said, “John indeed baptized
with water; but you shall be baptized in the Holy

Acts 11:17

xxxvi

Acts 11:28

Spirit.” 17 Then if God gave to them the same
gift as he gave to us when we believed on the
Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could oppose
God?” 18 When they heard these things, they said
nothing in response, but they praised God and
said, “Then God has given repentance for life to
the Gentiles also.”
19 Now those who had been scattered by the
persecution that arose over Stephen spread as
far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking
the word only to Jews. 20 But some of them,
men from Cyprus and Cyrene, came to Antioch
and spoke also to Greeks, telling them the good
news about the Lord Jesus. 21 The hand of the
Lord was with them; a great number believed
and turned to the Lord. 22 News about them
came to the ears of the church in Jerusalem,
and they sent out Barnabas as far as Antioch.
23 When he came and saw the grace of God, he
was glad; and he encouraged them all to remain
with the Lord with all their heart. 24 For he was
a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of
faith, and many people were added to the Lord.
25 Barnabas then went out to Tarsus to look for
Saul. 26 When he found him, he brought him
to Antioch. It came about, that for an entire
year they gathered together with the church and
taught many people. The disciples were called
Christians first in Antioch.
27 Now in these days some prophets came
down from Jerusalem to Antioch. 28 One of
them, Agabus by name, stood up and indicated
by the Spirit that a great famine would occur

Acts 11:29

xxxvii

Acts 12:9

over all the world. This happened in the days
of Claudius. 29 So, the disciples, as each one
was able, decided to send help to the brothers
in Judea. 30 They did this; they sent money to the
elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.
1 Now

12

about that time Herod the king laid
hands on some who belonged to the church so
that he might mistreat them. 2 He killed James
the brother of John with the sword. 3 After he
saw that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded to
arrest Peter also. That was during the days of
unleavened bread. 4 After arresting him, he put
him in prison, assigning him over to four squads
of soldiers to guard him; he was intending to
bring him to the people after the Passover. 5 So
Peter was kept in the prison, but prayer was
made earnestly to God for him by those in the
church. 6 On the night before Herod was going
to bring him out for trial, Peter was sleeping
between two soldiers, bound with two chains,
while guards in front of the door were keeping
watch over the prison. 7 Behold, an angel of
the Lord suddenly appeared by him, and a light
shone in the prison cell. He struck Peter on the
side and woke him and said, “Get up quickly,”
and his chains fell off his hands. 8 The angel
said to him, “Dress yourself and put on your
sandals.” Peter did so. The angel said to him,
“Put on your outer garment and follow me.”
9 So Peter followed the angel and went out. He
did not know that what was done by the angel

Acts 12:10

xxxviii

Acts 12:19

was real. He thought he was seeing a vision.
10 After they had passed by the first guard and
the second, they came to the iron gate that led
into the city; it opened for them by itself. They
went out and went down a street, and the angel
left him right away. 11 When Peter came to
himself, he said, “Now I truly know that the Lord
has sent his angel and delivered me out of the
hand of Herod, and from everything the Jewish
people were expecting.” 12 When he realized
this, he went to the house of Mary the mother of
John, also called Mark, where many people had
gathered and were praying. 13 When he knocked
at the door of the gate, a servant girl named
Rhoda came to answer. 14 When she recognized
Peter's voice, out of joy she failed to open the
door; instead, she came running into the room;
she reported that Peter was standing at the door.
15 So they said to her, “You are insane.” But she
insisted that it was so. They said, “It is his angel.”
16 But Peter continued knocking, and when they
had opened the door, they saw him and were
amazed. 17 Peter motioned to them with his hand
to be silent, and he told them how the Lord had
brought him out of prison. He said, “Report
these things to James and the brothers.” Then
he left and went to another place. 18 Now when
it became day, there was no small disturbance
among the soldiers over what had happened to
Peter. 19 After Herod had searched for him and
could not find him, he questioned the guards and
ordered them to be put to death. Then he went
down from Judea to Caesarea and stayed there.

Acts 12:20

xxxix

Acts 13:4

20 Now Herod was very angry with the people

of Tyre and Sidon. They went to him together.
They persuaded Blastus, the king's assistant, to
help them. Then they asked for peace, because
their country received its food from the king's
country. 21 On a set day Herod dressed himself
in royal clothing and sat on a throne; he made a
speech to them. 22 The people shouted, “This is
the voice of a god, not of a man!” 23 Immediately
an angel of the Lord struck him, because he did
not give God the glory; he was eaten by worms
and died.
24 But the word of God increased and multiplied.
25 So when Barnabas and Saul had completed
their mission, they returned from * Jerusalem,
bringing with them John, also called Mark.

13

1 Now in the church in Antioch,

there were
some prophets and teachers. They were Barnabas, Simeon (who is called Niger), Lucius of
Cyrene, Manaen (the foster brother of Herod
the tetrarch), and Saul. 2 While they were
worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit
said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul, to do
the work to which I have called them.” 3 After
they had fasted, prayed, and laid their hands on
these men, they sent them off.
4 So Barnabas and Saul obeyed the Holy Spirit
and went down to Seleucia; from there they
* 12:25 Some ancient copies read, they returned to Jerusalem .

Acts 13:5

xl

Acts 13:14

sailed to the island of Cyprus. 5 When they
were in the city of Salamis, they proclaimed
the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews.
They also had John Mark as their assistant.
6 When they had gone through the whole island
to Paphos, they found a certain magician, a
Jewish false prophet, whose name was Bar Jesus.
7 This magician associated with the proconsul,
Sergius Paulus, who was an intelligent man. This
man summoned Barnabas and Saul, because
he wanted to hear the word of God. 8 But
Elymas “the magician” (that is how his name is
translated) opposed them; he tried to turn the
proconsul away from the faith. 9 But Saul, who
is also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit,
stared at him intensely. 10 and said, “You son
of the devil, you are full of all kinds of deceit
and wickedness. You are an enemy of every kind
of righteousness. You will never stop twisting
the straight paths of the Lord, will you? 11 Now
look, the hand of the Lord is upon you, and you
will become blind. You will not see the sun for a
while.” Immediately there fell on Elymas a mist
and darkness; he started going around asking
people to lead him by the hand. 12 After the
proconsul saw what had happened, he believed,
because he was astonished at the teaching about
the Lord.
13 Now

Paul and his friends set sail from
Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia. But
John left them and returned to Jerusalem. 14 Paul
and his friends traveled from Perga and came
to Antioch of Pisidia. There they went into

Acts 13:15

xli

Acts 13:25

the synagogue on the Sabbath day and sat
down. 15 After the reading of the law and the
prophets, the leaders of the synagogue sent them
a message saying, “Brothers, if you have any
message of encouragement for the people here,
say it.” 16 So Paul stood up and motioned with
his hand; he said, “Men of Israel and you who
honor God, listen. 17 The God of this people
Israel chose our fathers and made the people
numerous when they stayed in the land of Egypt,
and with an uplifted arm he led them out of it.
18 For about forty years he put up with them
in the wilderness. * 19 After he had destroyed
seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave
our people their land for an inheritance. 20 All
these events took place over four hundred and
fifty years. After all these things, God gave them
judges until Samuel the prophet. 21 Then the
people asked for a king, and God gave them Saul
son of Kish, a man from the tribe of Benjamin,
to be king for forty years. 22 After God removed
him from the kingship, he raised up David to be
their king. It was about David that God said, 'I
have found David son of Jesse to be a man after
my heart, who does all I want him to do.' 23 From
this man's descendants God has brought to Israel
a savior, Jesus, as he promised to do. 24 This
began to happen when, before Jesus came, John
first announced the baptism of repentance to all
the people of Israel. 25 As John was finishing his
* 13:18 Some ancient copies read, For about forty years he cared
for them in the wilderness .

Acts 13:26

xlii

Acts 13:36

work, he said, 'Who do you think I am? I am not
the one. But listen, one is coming after me, the
shoes of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.'
26 Brothers, children of the line of Abraham, and
those among you who worship God, it is to us
that the message about this salvation has been
sent. 27 For they who live in Jerusalem, and
their rulers, did not recognize him, and they
fulfilled sayings of the prophets that are read
every Sabbath by condemning him. 28 Even
though they found no good cause for death in
him, they asked Pilate to kill him. 29 When they
had completed all the things that were written
about him, they took him down from the tree
and laid him in a tomb. 30 But God raised him
from the dead. 31 He was seen for many days by
those who had come up with him from Galilee to
Jerusalem. These people are now his witnesses
to the people. 32 So we are telling you the good
news that what God promised to our fathers 33 he
has fulfilled for us, their children, by raising up
Jesus. As it is written in the second Psalm:
'You are my Son, today I have become your
Father.'
34 The fact that he raised him up from the dead so
that his body would never decay, God has spoken
in this way:
'I will give you the holy and sure blessings
promised to David.'
35 This is why he also says in another Psalm,
'You will not allow your Holy One to see decay.'
36 For when David had served the desires of God
in his own generation, he fell asleep; he was laid

Acts 13:37

xliii

Acts 13:46

with his fathers and his body experienced decay.
37 But he whom God raised up experienced no
decay. 38 So let it be known to you, brothers,
that through this man is proclaimed to you
forgiveness of sins. 39 By him every one who
believes is justified from all the things which the
law of Moses could not justify you. 40 So then be
careful that the thing the prophets spoke about
does not happen to you:
41 'Look, you despisers, and be astonished and

then perish;
For I am doing a work in your days,
A work that you shall never believe, even if
someone announces it to you.'”

42 As Paul and Barnabas left, the people begged

them that they might speak these same words
again the next Sabbath. 43 When the synagogue
meeting ended, many of the Jews and devout
proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who
spoke to them and urged them to continue in the
grace of God.
44 On the next Sabbath, almost the whole city

was gathered together to hear the word of the
Lord. 45 When the Jews saw the crowds, they
were filled with jealousy and spoke against the
things that were said by Paul and insulted him.
46 But Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly and
said, “It was necessary that the word of God
should first be spoken to you. Seeing you push
it away from yourselves and consider yourselves
unworthy of eternal life, see, we will turn to the

Acts 13:47

xliv

Acts 14:4

Gentiles. 47 For so has the Lord commanded us,
saying,
'I have placed you as a light for the Gentiles,
that you should bring salvation to the uttermost
parts of the earth.'”
48 As the Gentiles heard this, they were glad and
praised the word of the Lord. As many as were
appointed to eternal life believed. 49 The word
of the Lord was spread out through the whole
region. 50 But the Jews urged on the devout and
important women, as well as the leading men of
the city. These stirred up a persecution against
Paul and Barnabas and threw them out beyond
the border of their city. 51 But Paul and Barnabas
shook off the dust from their feet against them.
Then they went to the city of Iconium. 52 And the
disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy
Spirit.
1 It

14

came about in Iconium that Paul and
Barnabas entered together into the synagogue of
the Jews and spoke in such a way that a great
multitude both of Jews and of Greeks believed.
2 But the Jews who were disobedient stirred up
the minds of the Gentiles and made them bitter
against the brothers. 3 So they stayed there for a
long time, speaking boldly with the Lord's power,
while he gave evidence about the message of
his grace. He did this by granting signs and
wonders to be done by the hands of Paul and
Barnabas. 4 But the majority of the city was
divided: some people sided with the Jews, and

Acts 14:5

xlv

Acts 14:17

some with the apostles. 5 When both Gentiles
and Jews attempted to persuade their leaders to
mistreat and stone Paul and Barnabas, 6 they
became aware of it and fled to the cities of
Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbe, and the surrounding
region, 7 and there they were proclaiming the
gospel.
8 At

Lystra a certain man sat, powerless in
his feet, a cripple from his mother's womb,
who never had walked. 9 This man heard Paul
speaking. Paul fixed his eyes on him and saw
that he had faith to be made well. 10 So he said
to him in a loud voice, “Stand up on your feet.”
Then the man jumped up and walked around.
11 When the multitude saw what Paul had done,
they raised their voice, saying in the dialect of
Lycaonia, “The gods have come down to us in the
form of men.” 12 They called Barnabas “Zeus,”
and Paul, “Hermes,” because he was the main
speaker. 13 The priest of Zeus, whose temple was
just outside the city, brought oxen and wreaths to
the gates; he and the multitudes wanted to offer
sacrifice. 14 But when the apostles, Barnabas
and Paul, heard of it, they tore their clothing
and quickly went out into the crowd, crying
out 15 and saying, “Men, why are you doing
these things? We also are human beings with
the same feelings as you. We bring you good
news, that you should turn from these useless
things to a living God, who made the heavens,
the earth, and the sea and everything that is in
them. 16 In the past ages, he allowed all the
nations to walk in their own ways. 17 But still,

Acts 14:18

xlvi

Acts 14:28

he did not leave himself without witness, in that
he did good and gave you the rains from heaven
and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with food
and gladness.” 18 Even with these words, Paul
and Barnabas barely kept the multitudes from
sacrificing to them.
19 But some Jews from Antioch and Iconium

came and persuaded the crowds. They stoned
Paul and dragged him out of the city, thinking
that he was dead. 20 Yet as the disciples were
standing around him, he got up and entered
the city. The next day, he went to Derbe with
Barnabas. 21 After they had proclaimed the
gospel in that city and made many disciples, they
returned to Lystra, to Iconium, and to Antioch.
22 They kept strengthening the souls of the disciples and encouraging them to continue in the
faith, saying, “We must enter into the kingdom
of God through many sufferings.” 23 When they
had appointed for them elders in every church,
and had prayed with fasting, they entrusted
them to the Lord, in whom they had believed.
24 Then they passed through Pisidia and came to
Pamphylia. 25 When they had spoken the word
in Perga, they went down to Attalia. 26 From
there they sailed to Antioch, where they had
been committed to the grace of God for the
work which they had now completed. 27 When
they arrived in Antioch and gathered the church
together, they reported all the things that God
had done with them, and how he had opened a
door of faith for the Gentiles. 28 They stayed for

Acts 15:1

xlvii

Acts 15:9

a long time with the disciples.

15

1 Some men came down from Judea to Antioch

and taught the brothers, saying, “Unless you are
circumcised according to the custom of Moses,
you cannot be saved.” 2 This brought Paul and
Barnabas into a sharp dispute and debate with
them. So Paul and Barnabas along with some
others from among them were appointed to go
up to Jerusalem to meet with the apostles and
elders about this question. 3 They therefore,
being sent by the church, passed through both
Phoenicia and Samaria and announced the conversion of the Gentiles. They brought great joy to
all the brothers. 4 When they came to Jerusalem,
they were welcomed by the church and the
apostles and the elders, and they reported all
the things that God had done with them. 5 But
certain men who believed, who belonged to the
group of Pharisees, stood up and said, “It is
necessary to circumcise them and to command
them to keep the law of Moses.” 6 So the apostles
and the elders gathered together to consider this
matter. 7 After much debate, Peter stood up and
said to them,
“Brothers, you know that a good while ago God
made a choice among you, that by my mouth the
Gentiles should hear the word of the gospel, and
believe. 8 God, who knows the heart, witnesses
to them, giving them the Holy Spirit, just as he
did to us; 9 and he made no distinction between
us and them, making their hearts clean by faith.

Acts 15:10

xlviii

Acts 15:21

10 Now therefore why do you test God, that you

should put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples
which neither our fathers nor we were able to
bear? 11 But we believe that we shall be saved
through the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they
were.”
12 All the multitude kept silent while they listened to Barnabas and Paul report the signs and
wonders God had worked among the Gentiles
through them. 13 After they stopped speaking,
James answered, saying,
“Brothers, listen to me. 14 Simon has told how
God first graciously helped the Gentiles in order
to take from them a people for his name. 15 The
words of the prophets agree with this, as it is
written,
16 'After these things I will return,
and I will build again the tent of David, which
has fallen down;
I will set up and restore its ruins again,
17 so that the remnant of men may seek the Lord,
including all the Gentiles called by my name.'
18 This is what the Lord says, who has done these
things that have been known from ancient
times. *
19 Therefore, my opinion is, that we should not
trouble those of the Gentiles who turn to God.
20 But we will write to them that they must keep
away from the pollution of idols, from sexual
immorality, and from the meat of strangled
animals, and from blood. 21 For Moses has been
* 15:18 Some older versions read, This is what the Lord says, to
whom are known all his deeds from ancient times .

Acts 15:22

xlix

Acts 15:33

proclaimed in every city from the ancient times
and he is read in the synagogues every Sabbath.”
22 Then it seemed good to the apostles and the
elders, with the whole church, to choose Judas
called Barsabbas, and Silas, who were leaders of
the church, and send them to Antioch with Paul
and Barnabas. 23 They wrote this: “From the
apostles and elders, your brothers, to the Gentile
brothers in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: Greetings!
24 We have heard that certain men have gone
out from us, with no orders from us, and have
disturbed you with teachings that upset your
souls. 25 This being so, all of us have agreed to
choose men and to send them to you along with
our beloved Barnabas and Paul, 26 men who have
risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 27 Therefore we are sending Judas and
Silas, who will tell you the same thing themselves
in their own words. 28 For it seemed good to the
Holy Spirit and to us, to lay upon you no greater
burden than these necessary things: 29 that you
abstain from things sacrificed to idols, blood,
things strangled, and from sexual immorality. If
you keep yourselves from these, it shall be well
with you. Farewell.”
30 So they, when they were dismissed, came
down to Antioch; after they gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter. 31 When
they had read it, they rejoiced because of the encouragement. 32 Judas and Silas, also prophets,
encouraged the brothers with many words and
strengthened them. 33 After they had spent
some time there, they were sent away in peace

Acts 15:34

l

Acts 16:4

from the brothers to those who had sent them.
34 † 35 But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch
along with many others, where they taught and
proclaimed the word of the Lord.
36 After some days Paul said to Barnabas, “Let
us return now and visit the brothers in every
city where we proclaimed the word of the Lord,
and see how they are.” 37 Barnabas wanted
to also take with them John who was called
Mark. 38 But Paul thought it was not good to take
Mark, who had left them in Pamphylia and did
not go further with them in the work. 39 Then
there arose a sharp disagreement, so that they
separated from each other, and Barnabas took
Mark with him and sailed away to Cyprus. 40 But
Paul chose Silas and left, after he was entrusted
by the brothers to the grace of the Lord. 41 Then
he went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening
the churches.

16

1 Paul also came to Derbe and to Lystra; and

behold, a certain disciple named Timothy was
there, the son of a Jewish woman who believed;
his father was a Greek. 2 He was well spoken of
by the brothers who were at Lystra and Iconium.
3 Paul wanted him to travel with him; so he
took him and circumcised him because of the
Jews that were in those places, for they all knew
that his father was a Greek. 4 As they went
on their way through the cities, they delivered
† 15:34 The best ancient copies omit verse 34 (See: Acts 15:40),
But it seemed good to Silas to remain there .

Acts 16:5

li

Acts 16:15

to the churches the instructions for them to
obey, the instructions that had been written by
the apostles and elders in Jerusalem. 5 So the
churches were strengthened in the faith and
increased in number daily.
6 Paul and his companions went through the
regions of Phrygia and Galatia, since they had
been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to proclaim the
word in the province of Asia. 7 When they came
near Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia,
but the Spirit of Jesus prevented them. 8 So
passing by Mysia, they came down to the city of
Troas. 9 A vision appeared to Paul in the night:
A man of Macedonia was standing there, calling
him and saying, “Come over into Macedonia and
help us.” 10 When Paul had seen the vision,
immediately we set out to go to Macedonia,
concluding that God had called us to proclaim
the gospel to them.
11 Setting sail therefore from Troas, we made a
straight course to Samothrace, and the next day
we came to Neapolis. 12 From there we went
to Philippi, which is a city of Macedonia, the
most important city in the district and a Roman
colony, and we stayed in this city for several
days. 13 On the Sabbath day we went outside
the gate by the river, where we thought there
would be a place of prayer. We sat down and
spoke to the women who had come together. 14 A
certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple
from the city of Thyatira, who worshiped God,
listened to us. The Lord opened her heart to
pay attention to what was said by Paul. 15 When

Acts 16:16

lii

Acts 16:25

she and her house were baptized, she urged us,
saying, “If you have judged me to be faithful
to the Lord, come and stay in house.” And
she persuaded us. 16 It came about that, as
we were going to the place of prayer, a certain
young woman who had a spirit of divination
encountered us. She brought her masters much
gain by fortunetelling. 17 This woman followed
after Paul and us and shouted, saying, “These
men are servants of the Most High God. They
proclaim to you the way of salvation.” 18 She
did this for many days. But Paul, being greatly
annoyed by her, turned and said to the spirit,
“I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to
come out of her.” And it came out right away.
19 When her masters saw that their opportunity to make money was now gone, they
seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into
the marketplace before the authorities. 20 When
they had brought them to the magistrates, they
said, “These men are stirring up our city. They
are Jews. 21 They proclaim customs that are
not lawful for Romans to accept or practice.”
22 Then the crowd rose up together against Paul
and Silas; the magistrates tore their garments
off them and commanded them to be beaten
with rods. 23 When they had laid many blows
upon them, they threw them into prison and
commanded the jailer to keep them securely.
24 After he got this command, the jailer threw
them into the inner prison and fastened their
feet in the stocks. 25 Around midnight Paul and
Silas were praying and singing hymns to God,

Acts 16:26

liii

Acts 16:37

and the other prisoners were listening to them.
26 Suddenly there was a great earthquake, so
that the foundations of the prison were shaken;
and immediately all the doors were opened,
and everyone's chains were unfastened. 27 The
jailer was awakened from sleep and saw the
open prison doors; he drew his sword and was
about to kill himself, because he thought that
the prisoners had escaped. 28 But Paul shouted
with a loud voice, saying, “Do not harm yourself,
because we are all here.” 29 The jailer called for
lights and rushed in and, trembling for fear, fell
down before Paul and Silas, 30 and brought them
out and said, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?”
31 They said, “Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you
will be saved, you and your house.” 32 They
spoke the word of the Lord to him, together with
everyone in his house. 33 Then the jailer took
them at the same hour of the night, and washed
their wounds, and he and those in his entire
house were baptized immediately. 34 Then as
he brought Paul and Silas up into his house and
he set food before them, he rejoiced greatly with
those of his house, that he had believed in God.
35 Now when it was day, the magistrates sent
word to the guards, saying, “Let those men go.”
36 The jailer reported the words to Paul, saying,
“The magistrates have sent word to me to let you
go. Now therefore come out, and go in peace.”
37 But Paul said to them, “They have publicly
beaten us without a trial, even through we are
Romans citizens—and they threw us into prison.
Do they now want to send us away secretly?

Acts 16:38

liv

Acts 17:6

No! Let them come themselves and lead us
out.” 38 The guards reported these words to the
magistrates, and when they heard that Paul and
Silas were Romans, they were afraid. 39 The
magistrates came and apologized to them and
brought them out, asking them them to go away
from the city. 40 So Paul and Silas went out of
the prison and came to the house of Lydia. When
Paul and Silas saw the brothers, they encouraged
them and then departed from the city.
1 Now

17

when they had passed through the
cities of Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came
to the city of Thessalonica, where there was a
synagogue of the Jews. 2 Paul, as his custom
was, went to them, and for three Sabbath days
reasoned with them from the scriptures. 3 He
was opening the scriptures and explaining that
it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and
to rise again from the dead. He said, “This
Jesus whom I proclaim to you is the Christ.”
4 Some of the Jews were persuaded and joined
Paul and Silas, including a large number of
devout Greeks, and not a few of the leading
women. 5 But the unbelieving Jews, being moved
with jealousy, took certain wicked men from the
marketplace, gathered a crowd together, and set
the city in an uproar. Assaulting the house of
Jason, they wanted to bring Paul and Silas out to
the people. 6 But when they did not find them,
they dragged Jason and certain other brothers
before the officials of the city, crying, “These

Acts 17:7

lv

Acts 17:18

men who have turned the world upside down
have come here also. 7 These men whom Jason
has welcomed act against the decrees of Caesar;
they say that there is another king—Jesus.” 8 The
crowd and the officials of the city were disturbed
when they heard these things. 9 But after the
officials made Jason and the rest pay money as
security, then they let them go.
10 That night the brothers sent Paul and Silas to

Berea. When they arrived there, they went into
the synagogue of the Jews. 11 Now these people
were more noble than those in Thessalonica,
for they received the word with all readiness
of mind, examining the scriptures daily to see
whether these things were so. 12 Therefore many
of them believed, including some influential
Greek women and many men. 13 But when the
Jews of Thessalonica learned that Paul was also
proclaiming the word of God at Berea, they went
there and stirred up and troubled the crowds.
14 Then immediately, the brothers sent Paul to
go to the sea, but Silas and Timothy stayed there.
15 Those who were leading Paul took him as far
as the city of Athens. As they left Paul there,
they received from him instructions for Silas and
Timothy to come to him as quickly as possible.
16 Now

while Paul was waiting for them in
Athens, his spirit was provoked within him as
he saw the city full of idols. 17 So he reasoned
in the synagogue with the Jews and others who
worshiped God, as well as in the marketplace
with those who happened to be there. 18 But also

Acts 17:19

lvi

Acts 17:27

some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers
encountered him. Some said, “What is this
babbler trying to say?” Others said, “He seems
to be one who calls people to follow strange
gods,” because he was proclaiming Jesus and
the resurrection. 19 They took Paul and brought
him to the Areopagus, saying, “May we know
this new teaching which you were speaking?
20 For you bring some strange things to our
ears. Therefore, we want to know what these
things mean.” 21 (Now all the Athenians and the
strangers living there spent their time in nothing
but either telling or listening about something
new.) 22 So Paul stood in the middle of the
Areopagus and said,
“You men of Athens, I see that you are very
religious in every way. 23 For as I passed along
and observed the objects of your worship, I
found an altar with this inscription, “To an
Unknown God.” What therefore you worship
in ignorance, this I announce to you. 24 The
God who made the world and everything in it,
since he is Lord of heaven and earth, does not
live in temples built with hands. 25 Neither is
he served by men's hands, as though he needed
anything, since he himself gives people life and
breath and everything else. 26 From one man
he made every nation of people to live on the
surface of the earth, having determined their
appointed seasons and the boundaries of their
living areas, 27 so that they should search for God
and perhaps they may feel their way toward him
and find him. Yet he is not far from each one of

Acts 17:28

lvii

Acts 18:5

us. 28 For in him we live and move and have our
being, just as one of your own poets has said,
'For we also are his offspring.' 29 Therefore,
since we are God's offspring, we ought not to
think that the qualities of deity are like gold,
or silver, or stone—images created by the art
30 Therefore God
and imagination of man.
overlooked the times of ignorance, but now he
commands all men everywhere to repent. 31 This
is because he has set a day when he will judge
the world in righteousness by the man he has
chosen. God has given proof of this man to
everyone by raising him from the dead.”
32 Now when the men of Athens heard of the
resurrection of the dead, some mocked Paul;
but others said, “We will listen to you again
about this matter.” 33 After that, Paul left them.
34 But certain men joined him and believed,
including Dionysius the Areopagite, a woman
named Damaris, and others with them.

18

1 After these things Paul left Athens and went
to Corinth. 2 There he met a Jew named Aquila,

a native of Pontus, who had recently come from
Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had
commanded all the Jews to leave Rome. Paul
went to them, 3 and because he worked at the
same trade, he stayed with them and worked,
for they were tentmakers by trade. 4 So Paul
reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath. He
persuaded both Jews and Greeks. 5 But when
Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia,

Acts 18:6

lviii

Acts 18:17

Paul was compelled by the Spirit to testify to the
Jews that Jesus was the Christ. 6 When the Jews
opposed and insulted him, Paul shook out his
garment at them and said to them, “May your
blood be upon your own heads; I am innocent.
From now on I will go to the Gentiles.” 7 Then he
left from there and went to the house of Titius
Justus, a man who worshiped God. His house
was next to the synagogue. 8 Crispus, the leader
of the synagogue, believed in the Lord, together
with all those who lived in his house; and many
of the Corinthians who heard about it believed
and were baptized. 9 The Lord said to Paul in
the night in a vision, “Do not be afraid, but speak
and do not be silent. 10 For I am with you, and no
one will try to harm you, for I have many people
in this city.” 11 Paul lived there for a year and six
months, teaching the word of God among them.
12 But when Gallio became governor of Achaia,
the Jews rose up together against Paul and
brought him before the judgment seat; 13 they
said, “This man persuades people to worship
God contrary to the law.” 14 Yet when Paul was
about to speak, Gallio said to the Jews, “You
Jews, if indeed it were a matter of wrong or a
crime, it would be reasonable to deal with you.
15 But since these are questions about words and
names and your own law, settle it yourselves.
I do not wish to be a judge of these matters.”
16 Gallio made them leave the judgment seat.
17 So they all seized Sosthenes, the ruler of the
synagogue, and beat him in front of the judgment
seat. But Gallio did not care what they did.

Acts 18:18

18 Paul,

lix

Acts 18:28

after staying there for many more
days, left the brothers and sailed for Syria with
Priscilla and Aquila. Before he left the seaport,
Cenchrea, he had his hair cut off because of
a vow he had taken. 19 When they came to
Ephesus, Paul left Priscilla and Aquila there,
but he himself went into the synagogue and
reasoned with the Jews. 20 When they asked Paul
to stay a longer time, he declined. 21 But taking
his leave of them, he said, “I will return again
to you if it is God's will.” He then set sail from
Ephesus.
22 When Paul had landed at Caesarea, he
went up and greeted the Jerusalem church and
then went down to Antioch. 23 After having
spent some time there, Paul departed and went
through the regions of Galatia and Phrygia and
strengthened all the disciples.
24 Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an
Alexandrian by birth, came to Ephesus. He was
eloquent in speech and mighty in the scriptures.
25 Apollos had been instructed in the teachings
of the Lord. Being fervent in spirit, he spoke and
taught accurately the things concerning Jesus,
but he knew only the baptism of John. 26 Apollos
began to speak boldly in the synagogue. But
when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took
him aside and explained to him the way of God
more accurately. 27 When he desired to pass
over into Achaia, the brothers encouraged him
and wrote to the disciples in Achaia to welcome
him. When he arrived, he greatly helped those
who believed by grace. 28 Apollos powerfully

Acts 19:1

lx

Acts 19:12

refuted the Jews in public debate, showing by the
scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.
1 It

19

came about that while Apollos was at
Corinth, Paul passed through the upper country
and came to the city of Ephesus, and found
certain disciples there. 2 Paul said to them, “Did
you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?”
They said to him, “No, we did not even hear
about the Holy Spirit.” 3 Paul said, “Into what
then were you baptized?” They said, “Into John's
baptism.” 4 So Paul replied, “John baptized with
the baptism of repentance. He told the people
that they should believe in the one who would
come after him, that is, in Jesus.” 5 When the
people heard this, they were baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus. 6 Then when Paul had
laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came
on them and they spoke in other languages and
prophesied. 7 In all they were about twelve men.
8 Paul went into the synagogue and spoke
boldly for three months, reasoning and persuading them about the kingdom of God. 9 But when
some Jews were hardened and disobedient, they
began to speak evil of the Way before the crowd.
So Paul left them and took the disciples from him,
reasoning with them every day in the lecture
hall of Tyrannus. 10 This continued for two
years, so that all who lived in Asia heard the
word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks. 11 God
was doing mighty deeds by the hands of Paul,
12 so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that

Acts 19:13

lxi

Acts 19:23

had touched him were taken to the sick and
their illnesses left them and the evil spirits came
out of them. 13 But there were Jewish exorcists
traveling through the area. They called on the
name of the Lord Jesus so they could have power
over evil spirits when they said, “By the Jesus
whom Paul proclaims, I command you to come
out.” 14 The Jewish high priest, whose name
was Sceva, had seven sons who were doing this.
15 An evil spirit answered them, “Jesus I know,
and Paul I know; but who are you?” 16 The
evil spirit in the man leaped on the exorcists
and overpowered them and beat them up. Then
they fled out of that house naked and wounded.
17 This became known to all, both Jews and
Greeks, who lived at Ephesus. They became
very afraid, and the name of the Lord Jesus was
honored. 18 Also, many of the believers came
and confessed and admitted the evil things they
had done. 19 Many who practiced magical arts
brought their books together and burned them
in the sight of everyone. When they counted
the value of them, it was fifty thousand pieces
of silver. 20 So the word of the Lord spread very
widely in powerful ways.
21 Now after Paul completed his ministry in
Ephesus, he decided in the Spirit to pass through
Macedonia and Achaia on his way to Jerusalem;
he said, “After I have been there, I must also
see Rome.” 22 Paul sent to Macedonia two of his
helpers, Timothy and Erastus, who had helped
him. But he himself stayed in Asia for a while.
23 At about that time there was no small

Acts 19:24

lxii

Acts 19:33

disturbance in Ephesus concerning the Way.
24 A certain silversmith named Demetrius, who
made silver statues of Artemis, brought in much
business for the craftsmen. 25 So he gathered
together the workmen of that occupation and
said, “Sirs, you know that in this business we
make much money. 26 You see and hear that,
not only at Ephesus, but almost throughout all
Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away
many people. He is saying that there are no gods
that are made with hands. 27 Not only is there
danger that our trade will no longer be needed,
but also that the temple of the great goddess
Artemis may be considered worthless. Then she
would even lose her greatness, she whom all
Asia and the world worships.” 28 When they
heard this, they were filled with anger and cried
out, saying, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians.”
29 The whole city was filled with confusion, and
the people rushed together into the theater. They
had seized Paul's travel companions, Gaius and
Aristarchus, who came from Macedonia. 30 Paul
wanted to enter in among the crowd of people,
but the disciples prevented him. 31 Also, some of
the officials of the province of Asia who were his
friends sent him a message strongly requesting
him not to enter the theater. 32 Some people were
shouting one thing, and some another, for the
crowd was in confusion. Most of them did not
even know why they had come together. 33 Some
of the crowd informed Alexander, whom the
Jews were pushing to the front, and so Alexander
motioned with his hand, wanting to give an

Acts 19:34

lxiii

Acts 20:3

explanation to those who were assembled. 34 But
when they became aware that he was a Jew,
they all cried out for about two hours with
one voice, saying, “Great is Artemis of the
Ephesians.” 35 When the town clerk had quieted
the crowd, he said, “You men of Ephesus, what
man is there who does not know that the city
of the Ephesians is temple keeper of the great
Artemis and of the image which fell down from
heaven? 36 Seeing then that these things are
undeniable, you ought to be quiet and do nothing
rash. 37 For you have brought these men to
this court who are neither robbers of temples
nor blasphemers of our goddess. 38 Therefore,
if Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with
him have an accusation against anyone, the
courts are open and there are proconsuls. Let
them accuse one another. 39 But if you seek
anything about other matters, it shall be settled
in the regular assembly. 40 For indeed we are
in danger of being accused concerning this day's
riot. There is no cause for this disorder, and we
will not be able to explain it.” 41 When he had
said this, he dismissed the assembly.

20

1 After the uproar was over, Paul sent for the

disciples and after he encouraged them, he said
farewell and left to go into Macedonia. 2 When
he had gone through those regions and had
spoken many words of encouragement to them,
he came to Greece. 3 After he had spent three
months there, a plot was formed against him

Acts 20:4

lxiv

Acts 20:15

by the Jews as he was about to sail for Syria,
so he decided to return through Macedonia.
4 Accompanying him as far as Asia were Sopater
son of Pyrrhus from Berea; Aristarchus and
Secundus, both from the Thessalonian believers;
Gaius of Derbe; Timothy; and Tychicus and
Trophimus from Asia. 5 But these men had
gone before us and were waiting for us at Troas.
6 We sailed away from Philippi after the days of
unleavened bread, and in five days we came to
them in Troas. There we stayed for seven days.
7 On the first day of the week, when we were
gathered together to break bread, Paul spoke to
the believers. He was planning to leave the next
day, so he kept speaking until midnight. 8 There
were many lamps in the upper room where we
had come together. 9 In the window was sitting
a young man named Eutychus, who fell into a
deep sleep. As Paul spoke even longer, this young
man, still sleeping, fell down from the third story
and was picked up dead. 10 But Paul went down,
stretched himself out on him, and embraced him.
Then he said, “Do not be upset any more, for he is
alive.” 11 Then he went upstairs again and broke
bread and ate. After talking with them much
longer until dawn, he left. 12 They brought back
the boy alive and were greatly comforted.
13 We ourselves went ahead of Paul by ship
and sailed away to Assos, where we planned
to take Paul on board. This is what he himself
desired to do, because he planned to go by land.
14 When he met us at Assos, we took him onto
the ship and went to Mitylene. 15 Then we sailed

Acts 20:16

lxv

Acts 20:26

from there and arrived the next day opposite the
island of Chios. The following day we touched at
the island of Samos, and the day after we came
to the city of Miletus. 16 For Paul had decided
to sail past Ephesus, so that he would not spend
any time in Asia; for he was hurrying to be in
Jerusalem for the day of Pentecost, if it were at
all possible for him to do so.
From Miletus he sent men to Ephesus
and called to himself the elders of the church.
18 When they had come to him, he said to them,
17

“You yourselves know, from the first day that I
set foot in Asia, how I always spent my time with
you. 19 I kept serving the Lord with all lowliness
of mind and with tears, and in sufferings that
happened to me because of the plots of the
Jews. 20 You know how I did not keep back from
declaring to you anything that was useful, and
how I taught you in public and from house to
house, 21 testifying both Jews and Greeks about
repentance toward God and of faith in our Lord
Jesus. 22 Now look, I am going to Jerusalem,
compelled by the Spirit, not knowing what will
happen to me there, 23 except that the Holy
Spirit warns to me in every city that chains and
sufferings await me. 24 But I do not consider my
life is valuable to myself, if only I may finish the
race and complete the ministry that I received
from the Lord Jesus, to testify to the gospel of
the grace of God. 25 Now look, I know that you
all, among whom I went about proclaiming the
kingdom, will see my face no more. 26 Therefore

Acts 20:27

lxvi

Acts 20:37

I testify to you this day, that I am innocent of
the blood of any man. 27 For I did not hold
back from declaring to you the whole will of
God. 28 Therefore be careful about yourselves,
and about all the flock of which the Holy Spirit
has made you overseers. Be careful to shepherd
the church of God, which he purchased with his
own blood. * 29 I know that after my departure,
vicious wolves will come in among you and will
not spare the flock. 30 I know that from even
among you some men shall come and distort
the truth in order to draw away the disciples
after them. 31 So be on guard. Remember that
for three years I did not stop instructing every
one of you with tears night and day. 32 Now
I entrust you to God and to the word of his
grace, which is able to build you up and to give
you the inheritance among all those who are
being sanctified. 33 I coveted no man's silver,
gold, or clothing. 34 You yourselves know that
these hands served my own needs and the needs
of those who were with me. 35 In all things I
gave you an example of how you should help
the weak by working, and of how you should
remember the words of the Lord Jesus, words
that he himself said: “It is more blessed to give
than to receive.”
36 After he had spoken in this way, he knelt
down and prayed with them all. 37 There was a
lot of crying and they embraced Paul and kissed
* 20:28

Instead of with his own blood , some ancient copies
read, with the blood of his own Son .

Acts 20:38

lxvii

Acts 21:11

him. 38 They were sad most of all because of
what he had said, that they would never see his
face again. Then they escorted him to the ship.

21

1 When we had gone away from them and set

sail, we took a straight course to the city of Cos,
and the next day to the city of Rhodes, and from
there to the city of Patara. 2 When we found a
ship crossing over to Phoenicia, we went aboard
and set sail. 3 After sighting Cyprus, leaving it on
the left side of the boat, we sailed on to Syria and
landed at Tyre, where the ship was to unload its
cargo. 4 After we found the disciples, we stayed
there seven days. Through the Spirit they kept
urging Paul not to go to Jerusalem. 5 When our
days there were over, we left and went on our
way, and they all, with their wives and children,
accompanied out of the city. Then we knelt down
on the beach, prayed, 6 and said farewell to each
other. Then we went on board the ship, and they
returned home.
7 When we had finished the voyage from Tyre,
we arrived at Ptolemais. There we greeted the
brothers and stayed with them for one day. 8 On
the next day we left and went to Caesarea. We
entered the house of Philip, the evangelist, who
was one of the seven, and we stayed with him.
9 Now this man had four virgin daughters who
prophesied. 10 As we stayed there for some days,
there came down from Judea a certain prophet
named Agabus. 11 He came to us and took Paul's
belt. With it he tied his own feet and hands and

Acts 21:12

lxviii

Acts 21:21

said, “Thus says the Holy Spirit, 'So shall the Jews
in Jerusalem tie up the man who owns this belt,
and they will hand him over into the hands of
the Gentiles.'” 12 When we heard these things,
both we and the people who lived in that place
begged Paul not to go up to Jerusalem. 13 Then
Paul answered, “What are you doing, weeping
and breaking my heart? For I am ready, not only
to be tied up, but also to die in Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus.” 14 Since Paul did
not wish to be persuaded, we stopped trying and
said, “May the will of the Lord be done.”
15 After these days, we picked up our bags and
went up to Jerusalem. 16 There also went with

us some of the disciples from Caesarea. They
brought with them a man named Mnason, a man
from Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we
would stay.
17 When

we had arrived in Jerusalem, the
brothers welcomed us gladly. 18 The next day
Paul went with us to James, and all the elders
were present. 19 When he had greeted them,
he reported one by one the things that God had
done among the Gentiles through his ministry.
20 When they heard it, they praised God, and
they said to him, “You see, brother, how many
thousands have believed among the Jews. They
are all determined to keep the law. 21 They
have been told about you, that you teach all the
Jews who live among the Gentiles to abandon
Moses, and that you tell them not to circumcise
their children, and not to follow the old customs.

Acts 21:22

lxix

Acts 21:31

22 What should we do? They will certainly hear
that you have come. 23 So do what we say to you.
We have four men who made a vow. 24 Take

these men and purify yourself with them, and
pay their expenses for them, so that they may
shave their heads. So everyone will know that
the things they have been told about you are
false. They will learn that you also follow the
law. 25 But concerning the Gentiles who have
believed, we wrote and gave the instructions that
they should keep themselves from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from what is strangled,
and from sexual immorality.” 26 Then Paul took
the men, and the next day, purifying himself
with them, went into the temple, announcing
the period of the days of purification, until the
offering was offered for every one of them.
27 When the seven days were almost finished,
some Jews from Asia, seeing Paul in the temple,
stirred up the whole crowd, and laid hands on
him. 28 They were shouting, “Men of Israel,
help us. This is the man who teaches all men
everywhere things that are against the people,
the law, and this place. Besides, he has also
brought Greeks into the temple and has defiled
this holy place.” 29 For they had previously seen
Trophimus the Ephesian with him in the city,
and they thought that Paul had brought him
into the temple. 30 All the city was excited, and
the people ran together and laid hold of Paul.
They dragged him out of the temple, and the
doors were immediately shut. 31 As they were
trying to kill him, news came up to the chief

Acts 21:32

lxx

Acts 22:1

captain of the guard that all Jerusalem was in
an uproar. 32 Right away he took soldiers and
centurions and ran down to the crowd. When
the people saw the chief captain and the soldiers,
they stopped beating Paul. 33 Then the chief
captain approached and laid hold of Paul, and
commanded him to be bound with two chains.
Then he asked who he was and what he had
done. 34 Some in the crowd were shouting one
thing and others another. Since the captain
could not tell anything because of all the noise,
he ordered that Paul be brought into the fortress.
35 When he came to the steps, he was carried
by the soldiers because of the crowd's violence.
36 For the crowd of people followed after and
kept shouting out, “Away with him!”
37 As Paul was about to be brought into the
fortress, he said to the chief captain, “May I say
something to you?” The captain said, “Do you
speak Greek? 38 Are you not then the Egyptian,
who previously led a rebellion and led the four
thousand men of the 'Assassins' out into the
wilderness?” 39 Paul said, “I am a Jew, from
the city of Tarsus in Cilicia. I am a citizen of
an important city. I ask you, allow me to speak
to the people.” 40 When the captain had given
him permission, Paul stood on the steps and
motioned with the hand to the people. When
there was a deep silence, he spoke to them in
the Hebrew language. He said,

22

1 “Brothers and fathers, listen to my defense

Acts 22:2

lxxi

Acts 22:13

which I will now make to you.”
2 When the crowd heard Paul speak to them
in the Hebrew language, they became quiet. He
said,
3 “I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but
educated in this city at the feet of Gamaliel. I
was instructed according to the strict ways of the
law of our fathers. I am zealous for God, just
as all of you are today. 4 I persecuted this Way
to the death, binding up and delivering them to
prison both men and women, 5 as the high priest
and all the elders can bear witness. I received
letters from them for the brothers in Damascus,
and went there to bring them back in bonds to
Jerusalem in order for them to be punished. 6 It
happened that when I was traveling and nearing
Damascus, about noon suddenly a great light
from heaven began to shine around me. 7 I fell
to the ground and heard a voice say to me, 'Saul,
Saul, why are you persecuting me?' 8 I answered,
'Who are you, Lord?' He said to me, 'I am Jesus
of Nazareth, whom you are persecuting.' 9 Those
who were with me saw the light, but they did
not understand the voice of him who spoke to
me. 10 I said, 'What should I do, Lord?' The Lord
said to me, 'Arise and go into Damascus; there
you will be told everything that you must do.' 11 I
could not see because of that light's brightness,
and being led by the hands of those who were
with me, I came into Damascus. 12 There I met
a man named Ananias, a devout man according
to the law and well spoken of by all the Jews
who lived there. 13 He came to me, stood by

Acts 22:14

lxxii

Acts 22:25

me, and said, 'Brother Saul, receive your sight.'
In that very hour I saw him. 14 Then he said,
'The God of our fathers has chosen you to know
his will, to see the Righteous One, and to hear
the voice coming from his own mouth. 15 For
you shall be a witness for him to all men about
what you have seen and heard. 16 Now why
are you waiting? Arise, be baptized, and wash
away your sins, calling on his name.' 17 After
I had returned to Jerusalem, and while I was
praying in the temple, it happened that I was
given a vision. 18 I saw him say to me, 'Hurry and
leave Jerusalem quickly, because they will not
accept your testimony about me.' 19 I said, 'Lord,
they themselves know that I imprisoned and beat
those who believed in you in every synagogue.
20 When the blood of Stephen your witness was
spilled, I also was standing by and agreeing, and I
was guarding the cloaks of those who killed him.'
21 But he said to me, 'Go, because I will send you
far away to the Gentiles.'”
22 They listened to him until he said this. Then

they shouted and said, “Away with such a fellow
from the earth, for it is not right that he should
live.” 23 As they were shouting, throwing off
their cloaks, and throwing dust into the air, 24 the
chief captain commanded Paul to be brought
into the fortress. He ordered that he should be
questioned with scourging, so that he himself
might know why they were shouting against him
like that. 25 When they had tied him up with
the thongs, Paul said to the centurion who was

Acts 22:26

lxxiii

Acts 23:4

standing by, “Is it lawful for you to scourge a
man who is a Roman and who has not been put
on trial?” 26 When the centurion heard this, he
went to the chief captain and told him, saying,
“What are you about to do? For this man is a
Roman citizen.” 27 The chief captain came and
said to him, “Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?”
Paul said, “Yes.” 28 The chief captain answered,
“It was only with a large amount of money that I
acquired citizenship.” But Paul said, “I was born
a Roman citizen.” 29 Then the men who were
going to question him left him immediately. The
chief captain also was afraid, when he learned
that Paul was a Roman citizen, because he had
tied him up.
30 On the next day, the chief captain wanted

to know the truth about the Jews' accusations
against Paul. So he untied his bonds and ordered
the chief priests and all the council to meet. Then
he brought Paul down and placed him in their
midst.

23

1 Paul looked directly at the council members

and said, “Brothers, I have lived before God in all
good conscience until this day.” 2 The high priest
Ananias commanded those who stood by him to
strike him on the mouth. 3 Then said Paul to
him, “God will strike you, you whitewashed wall.
Are you sitting to judge me by the law, yet order
me to be struck, against the law?” 4 Those who
stood by said, “Is this how you insult God's high

Acts 23:5

lxxiv

Acts 23:13

priest?” 5 Paul said, “I did not know, brothers,
that he was high priest. For it is written,
You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your
people.”
6 When Paul saw that the one part of the
council were Sadducees and the other Pharisees,
he spoke loudly in the council, “Brothers, I am
a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. It is because I
have the certain hope of the resurrection of the
dead that I am being judged.” 7 When he said
this, an argument began between the Pharisees
and Sadducees, and the crowd was divided. 8 For
the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection,
no angels, and no spirits, but the Pharisees
acknowledge all of them. 9 So a large uproar
occurred, and some of the scribes belonging to
the Pharisees stood up and argued, saying, “We
find nothing wrong with this man. What if a
spirit or an angel has spoken to him?” 10 When
there arose a great argument, the chief captain
feared that Paul would be torn to pieces by
them, so he commanded the soldiers to go down
and take him by force from among the council
members, and bring him into the fortress.
11 The following night the Lord stood beside
him and said, “Do not be afraid, for as you have
testified about me in Jerusalem, so you must also
bear witness in Rome.”
12 When it became day, some Jews formed
a conspiracy and called a curse down upon
themselves with an oath not to eat nor drink
anything until they had killed Paul. 13 There
were more than forty men who formed this

Acts 23:14

lxxv

Acts 23:23

conspiracy. 14 They went to the chief priests
and the elders and said, “We have put ourselves
under a great curse, to eat nothing until we have
killed Paul. 15 Now, therefore, let the council tell
the chief captain to bring him down to you, as
if you would decide his case more precisely. As
for us, we are ready to kill him before he comes
here.” 16 But Paul's sister's son heard that they
were lying in wait, so he went and entered the
fortress and told Paul. 17 Paul called one of the
centurions and said, “Take this young man to
the chief captain, for he has something to tell
him.” 18 So the centurion took the young man
and brought him to the chief captain and said,
“Paul the prisoner called me to him, and asked
me to bring this young man to you. He has
something to say to you.” 19 The chief captain
took him by the hand to a private place and
asked him, “What is it that you have to tell
me?” 20 The young man said, “The Jews have
agreed to ask you to bring down Paul tomorrow
to the council, as if they were going to ask more
precisely about his case. 21 But do not give in
to them, because there are more than forty men
who are lying in wait for him. They have called
a curse down on themselves, neither to eat nor
to drink until they have killed him. Even now
they are ready, waiting for consent from you.”
22 So the chief captain let the young man go,
after instructing him, “Tell no one that you have
said these things to me.” 23 Then he called to
him two of the centurions and said, “Get two
hundred soldiers ready to go as far as Caesarea,

Acts 23:24

lxxvi

Acts 23:35

and seventy horsemen also, and two hundred
spearmen. You will leave at the third hour of
the night.” 24 He also ordered them to provide
animals which Paul could ride, and to take him
safely to Felix the governor. 25 Then he wrote a
letter like this:
26 “Claudius Lysias to the most excellent Governor Felix, greetings. 27 This man was arrested
by the Jews and was about to be killed by
them, when I came upon them with soldiers
and rescued him, since I learned that he was
a Roman citizen. 28 I wanted to know why
they accused him, so I took him down to their
council. 29 I learned that he was being accused
about questions concerning their own law, but
that there was no accusation against him that
deserved death or imprisonment. 30 Then it was
made known to me that there was a plot against
the man, so I immediately sent him to you,
and instructed his accusers also to bring their
charges against him in your presence. Farewell.”
31 So the soldiers obeyed their orders. They
took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris.
32 On the next day, most of the soldiers left the
horsemen to go with him and they themselves
returned to the fortress. 33 When the horsemen
reached Caesarea and delivered the letter to
the governor, they also presented Paul to him.
34 When the governor read the letter, he asked
what province Paul was from. When he learned
that he was from Cilicia, 35 he said, “I will
hear you fully when your accusers come here.”
Then he commanded him to be kept in Herod's

Acts 24:1

lxxvii

Acts 24:10

government headquarters.
1 After

24

five days, Ananias the chief priest,
certain elders, and an orator named Tertullus
went there. These men brought charges against
Paul before the governor. 2 When Paul stood
before the governor, Tertullus began to accuse
him and said to the governor, “Because of you
we have great peace, and your foresight brings
good reform to our nation;
3 so with all thankfulness we welcome everything that you do, most excellent Felix. 4 So that
I detain you no more, I ask you to briefly listen
to me with kindness. 5 For we have found this
man to be a pest and one who causes all the Jews
throughout the world to rebel. He is a leader of
the Nazarene sect. 6 He even tried to desecrate
the temple, so we arrested him. * 7 † 8 When
you question Paul about all these matters, you
will be able to learn about these charges we are
bringing against him.” ‡ 9 The Jews also joined
in the accusation, affirming that these charges
were true.
10 But when the governor motioned for Paul
to speak, Paul answered, “I understand that for
many years you have been a judge to this nation,
and so I gladly explain myself to you.
* 24:6

Some ancient copies add, “We wanted to judge him
† 24:7 Some ancient copies have
according to our our law .
vs 7, But Lysias, the officer, came and took him by force out of
‡ 24:8 Some ancient copies add to the first part
our hands .
of vs 8, sending us to you .

Acts 24:11

lxxviii

Acts 24:23

11 You will be able to find out that it has not

been more than twelve days since I went up to
worship in Jerusalem. 12 When they found me
in the temple, I did not argue with anyone, and I
did not stir up a crowd, either in the synagogues,
or in the city. 13 They cannot prove to you the
accusations they are now making against me.
14 But I admit this to you, that according to the
Way that they call a sect, in that same way I serve
the God of our fathers. I am faithful to all that is
in the law and the writings of the prophets. 15 I
have the same confident hope in God as these
men, that there will be a resurrection of both
the righteous and the wicked. 16 So I always
strive to have a clear conscience before God and
human beings. 17 Now after many years I came
to bring help to my nation and gifts of money.
18 When I did this, certain Jews from Asia found
me in a purification ceremony in the temple,
not with a crowd or an uproar. 19 These men
ought to be before you now and say what they
have against me, if they have anything. 20 Or
else, these same men should say what wrong
they found in me when I stood before the Jewish
council, 21 unless it is about this one thing that
I shouted out when I stood among them, 'It is
concerning the resurrection of those who have
died that I am on trial before you today.'”
22 Then Felix, who was well informed about

the Way, ajourned the hearing.
He said,
“When Lysias the commander comes down from
Jerusalem, I will decide your case.” 23 Then he
commanded the centurion that Paul should be

Acts 24:24

lxxix

Acts 25:6

kept under guard, but to have some freedom so
that none of his friends would be prevented from
attending to his needs.
24 After some days, Felix returned with Drusilla
his wife, a Jewess, and he sent for Paul and he
heard from him about faith in Christ Jesus. 25 But
when Paul reasoned with him about righteousness, self-control, and the coming judgment,
Felix became frightened and said, “Go away for
now. But when I have the opportunity later on, I
will send for you.” 26 At the same time he wanted
Paul to give money to him, so he often sent for
him and spoke with him. 27 But when two years
passed, Porcius Festus became the governor after
Felix, but Felix wanted to gain favor with the
Jews, so he left Paul to continue under guard.
1 Now,

25

Festus entered the province, and after three days, he went from Caesarea up to
Jerusalem. 2 The chief priest and the prominent
Jews brought accusations against Paul, and they
urged him 3 and asked him for a favor that would
put Paul in danger—that Festus might summon
Paul to Jerusalem so that they could kill him
along the way. 4 Festus answered that Paul
was being held at Caesarea, and that he himself
was going there soon. 5 “Therefore, those who
can,” he said, “should go there with us. If there
is something wrong with the man, you should
accuse him.”
6 Festus stayed not more than eight or ten
days and then he went down to Caesarea, and

Acts 25:7

lxxx

Acts 25:16

on the next day he sat in the judgment seat
and commanded Paul to be brought to him.
7 When he arrived, the Jews from Jerusalem
stood nearby, and they brought many serious
charges which they could not prove. 8 Paul
defended himself and said, “I have done nothing
wrong against the law of the Jews or against
the temple or against Caesar.” 9 But Festus
wanted to gain the favor of the Jews, and so he
answered Paul and said, “Do you want to go up
to Jerusalem and to be judged by me about these
things there?” 10 Paul said, “I stand before the
judgment seat of Caesar where I must be judged.
I have wronged no Jews, just as you also very
well know. 11 Though if I have done wrong and
if I have done what is worthy of death, I do not
refuse to die. But if their accusations are nothing,
no one may hand me over to them. I appeal to
Caesar.” 12 After Festus talked with the council,
he answered, “You have appealed to Caesar. To
Caesar you will go!”
13 Now after some days, King Agrippa and
Bernice arrived at Caesarea to pay an official
visit to Festus. 14 After he had been there for
many days, Festus presented Paul's case to the
king; he said, “A certain man was left behind
here by Felix as a prisoner. 15 When I was in
Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the
Jews brought charges against this man to me,
and they asked for a sentence of condemnation
against him. 16 I answered them that it was not
the custom of the Romans to hand over anyone
before the accused had faced his accusers and

Acts 25:17

lxxxi

Acts 25:26

had an opportunity to defend himself against the
charges. 17 Therefore, when they came together
here, I did not wait, but the next day I sat
in the judgment seat and I ordered the man
to be brought in. 18 When the accusers stood
up and accused him, I thought that none of
the charges that they brought against him were
serious. 19 Instead, they had certain disputes
with him about their own religion and about a
certain Jesus who was dead, whom Paul claims
to be alive. 20 I was not certain about how to
investigate this matter, and so I asked him if
he was willing to go to Jerusalem to stand trial
there about these charges. 21 But when Paul
appealed to be kept in custody while awaiting
the decision of the emperor, I ordered him to be
held in custody until I could send him to Caesar.”
22 Agrippa spoke to Festus, “I would also like to
listen to this man.” “Tomorrow,” Festus said,
“you will hear him.”
23 So on the next day, Agrippa and Bernice
came with much ceremony; they came into
the hall with the military officers and with
the prominent men of the city. When Festus
spoke the command, Paul was brought to them.
24 Festus said, “King Agrippa, and all you men
who are here with us, you see this man; all
the multitude of Jews consulted with me in
Jerusalem and here also, and they shouted to
me that he should no longer live. 25 I learned
that he had done nothing worthy of death; but
because he appealed to the emperor, I decided
to send him. 26 But I do not have something

Acts 25:27

lxxxii

Acts 26:10

definite to write to the emperor. For this reason,
I have brought him to you, especially to you,
King Agrippa, so that I might have something
more to write about the case. 27 For it seems
unreasonable for me to send a prisoner and to
not also state the charges against him.”

26

1 So Agrippa said to Paul, “You may speak for

yourself.” Then Paul stretched out his hand and
made his defense.
2 “I regard myself as happy, King Agrippa, to
make my case before you today against all the
accusations of the Jews; 3 especially, because
you are an expert in all the Jewish customs and
questions. So I ask you to hear me patiently.
4 Truly, all the Jews know how I lived from my
youth in my own nation and at Jerusalem. 5 They
knew me from the beginning and they should
admit that I lived as a Pharisee, the strictest party
of our religion. 6 Now I stand here to be judged
because of my certain hope in the promise made
by God to our fathers. 7 For this is the promise
that our twelve tribes sought to receive as they
earnestly worshiped God night and day. It is for
this certain hope, King Agrippa, that the Jews
accuse me. 8 Why should any of you think it is
unbelievable that God raises the dead? 9 Now
indeed, I myself thought that I should do many
things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth. 10 I
did these in Jerusalem. I locked up many of the
saints in prison by the authority I received from
the chief priests, and when they were killed, I

Acts 26:11

lxxxiii

Acts 26:20

cast my vote against them. 11 I punished them
many times in all the synagogues and I tried
to force them to blaspheme. I was furiously
enraged against them and I persecuted them
even to foreign cities. 12 While I was doing this,
I went to Damascus with authority and orders
from the chief priests; 13 and on the way there,
at midday, King, I saw a light from heaven that
was brighter than the sun and it shone around
both me and the men who were traveling with
me. 14 When we all fell to the ground, I heard
a voice speaking to me that said in the Hebrew
language, 'Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?
It is hard for you to kick a goad.' 15 Then I said,
'Who are you, Lord?' The Lord replied, 'I am
Jesus whom you persecute. 16 Now get up and
stand on your feet; because for this purpose I
appeared to you, to appoint you to be a servant
and a witness concerning the things that you
know about me now and the things that I will
show to you later; 17 and I will rescue you from
the people and from the Gentiles to whom I am
sending you, 18 to open their eyes and to turn
them from darkness to light and from the power
of Satan to God, so that they may receive from
God the forgiveness of sins and the inheritance
that I give to them who are sanctified by faith in
me.' 19 Therefore, King Agrippa, I did not disobey
the heavenly vision; 20 but, to those in Damascus
first, and then at Jerusalem, and throughout all
the country of Judea, and also to the Gentiles,
I gave them the message that that they should

Acts 26:21

lxxxiv

Acts 26:32

repent and turn to God, doing deeds worthy of
repentance. 21 For this cause the Jews arrested
me in the temple and tried to kill me. 22 God has
helped me until now, so I stand and testify to
the common people and to the great ones about
nothing more than what the prophets and Moses
said would happen— 23 that Christ must suffer
and that by being the first to rise from the dead,
he would proclaim light to our own people and
to the Gentiles.”
24 As Paul completed his defense, Festus said
with a loud voice, “Paul, you are insane; your
great learning makes you insane.” 25 But Paul
said, “I am not insane, most excellent Festus,
but what I am declaring is true and rational.
26 For the king knows about these things; and so,
I speak freely to him, for I am persuaded that
none of this is hidden from him; for this has
not been done in a corner. 27 Do you believe
the prophets, King Agrippa? I know that you
believe.” 28 Agrippa said to Paul, “In a short
time would you persuade me and make me a
Christian?” 29 Paul said, “I pray to God, that
whether in a short or long time, not you only,
but also all that hear me today, would be like
me, but without these prison chains.”
30 Then the king stood up, and the governor,
and Bernice also, and those who were sitting
with them; 31 when they left the hall, they talked
to one another and said, “This man does nothing
worthy of death or of bonds.” 32 Agrippa said
to Festus, “This man could have been freed if he
had not appealed to Caesar.”

Acts 27:1

lxxxv

Acts 27:11

27

1 When it was decided that we should sail for

Italy, they put Paul and some other prisoners
under the charge of a centurion named Julius of
the Imperial Regiment. 2 We boarded a ship from
Adramyttium, which was about to sail along the
coast of Asia. So we went to sea. Aristarchus
from Thessalonica in Macedonia went with us.
3 The next day we landed at the city of Sidon,
where Julius treated Paul kindly and allowed
him to go to his friends to receive their care.
4 From there we went to sea and sailed under
the lee of Cyprus, close to the island, because
the winds were against us. 5 Then we had sailed
across the sea and were near the coast of Cilicia
and Pamphylia, we landed at Myra, a city of
Lycia. 6 There, the centurion found a ship from
Alexandria that was going to sail to Italy. He
put us in it. 7 When we had sailed slowly for
many days and had finally arrived with difficulty
near Cnidus, the wind no longer allowed us to go
that way, so we sailed along the sheltered side of
Crete, opposite Salmone. 8 We sailed along the
coast with difficulty, until we came to a certain
place called Fair Havens, which is near the city
of Lasea.
9 We had now taken much time, the time of
the Jewish fast also had passed, and it had now
become dangerous to sail. So Paul warned them,
10 and said, “Men, I see that the voyage we are
about to take will be with injury and much loss,
not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our
lives.” 11 But the centurion paid more attention
to the master and to the owner of the ship than to

Acts 27:12

lxxxvi

Acts 27:21

those things that were spoken by Paul. 12 Because
the harbor was not easy to spend the winter in,
most of the sailors advised to sail from there, if
by any means we could reach the city of Phoenix,
to spend the winter there. Phoenix is a harbor
in Crete, and it faces northeast and southeast.
13 When the south wind began to blow gently, the
sailors thought that they had what they needed.
So they weighed anchor and sailed along Crete,
close to the shore. 14 But after a short time a
wind of hurricane force, called the northeaster,
began to beat down from the island. 15 When
the ship was caught by the storm and could
no longer head into the wind, we had to give
way to the storm and were driven along by the
wind. 16 We sailed along the lee of a small island
called Cauda, and with difficulty we were able
to secure the lifeboat. 17 When they had hoisted
the lifeboat up, they used its ropes to bind the
hull of the ship. They were afraid that they
should run upon the sandbars of Syrtis, so they
lowered the sea anchor and were driven along.
18 We took such a violent battering by the storm
that the next day they began throwing the cargo
overboard. 19 On the third day the sailors threw
overboard the ship's equipment with their own
hands. 20 When the sun and stars did not shine
on us for many days, and the great storm still
beat upon us, any more hope that we should be
saved was abandoned. 21 When they had gone
long without food, then Paul stood up among the
sailors and said, “Men, you should have listened
to me, and not have set sail from Crete, so as

Acts 27:22

lxxxvii

Acts 27:34

to get this injury and loss. 22 Now I urge you
to take courage, for there will be no loss of life
among you, but only the loss of the ship. 23 For
last night an angel of the God to whom I belong,
whom also I worship—his angel stood beside me
24 and said, 'Do not be afraid, Paul. You must
stand before Caesar, and see, God in his kindness
has given to you all those who are sailing with
you.' 25 Therefore be cheerful, men! For I trust
God that it will happen just as it was told to me.
26 But we must run aground upon some island.”
27 When the fourteenth night had come, as we
were driven this way and that in the Adriatic
Sea, about midnight the sailors thought that
they were approaching some land. 28 They took
soundings and found twenty fathoms; after a
little while, they took more soundings and found
fifteen fathoms. 29 They were afraid that we
might crash on the rocks, so they lowered four
anchors from the stern and prayed that morning
would come soon. 30 The sailors were looking
for a way to abandon the ship and had lowered
the lifeboat into the sea, and pretended that
they would throw down the anchors from the
bow. 31 But Paul said to the centurion and to
the soldiers, “Unless these men stay in the ship,
you cannot be saved.” 32 Then the soldiers cut
away the ropes of the boat and let it drift away.
33 When daylight was coming on, Paul urged
them all to take some food. He said, “This day
is the fourteenth day that you wait and do not
eat; you have eaten nothing. 34 So I urge you
to share some food, for this is necessary for you

Acts 27:35

lxxxviii

Acts 28:2

to survive. For not one of you will lose a single
hair from his head.” 35 When he had said this,
he took bread and he thanked God in the sight of
everyone. Then he broke the bread and began to
eat. 36 Then they were all encouraged and they
also took food. 37 We were 276 people in the ship.
38 When they had eaten enough, they made the
ship lighter by throwing out the wheat into the
sea. 39 When it was day, they did not recognize
the land, but they saw a bay with a beach, and
they discussed whether they could drive the ship
onto it. 40 So they cut loose the anchors and left
them in the sea. At the same time they loosed
the ropes of the rudders and raised the foresail
to the wind; and so they headed to the beach.
41 But they came to a place where two currents
met, and the ship ran into the ground. The bow
of the ship stuck there and remained unmovable,
but the stern began to break up because of the
waves' violence. 42 The soldiers' plan was to
kill the prisoners so that none of them could
swim away and escape. 43 But the centurion
wanted to save Paul, so he stopped their plan;
and he ordered those who could swim to jump
overboard first and get to land. 44 Then the rest
of the men should follow, some on planks, and
some on other things from the ship. In this way
it happened that all of us came safely to land.

28

1 When we were brought safely through, we
learned that the island was called Malta. 2 The

native people offered to us not just ordinary

Acts 28:3

lxxxix

Acts 28:13

kindness, but they lit a fire and welcomed us all,
because of the constant rain and cold. 3 But when
Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and placed
them on the fire, a viper came out because of
the heat, and fastened onto his hand. 4 When
the native people saw the animal hanging from
his hand, they said one to another, “This man
certainly is a murderer who escaped from the
sea, yet justice does not permit him to live.”
5 But then he shook the animal into the fire and
suffered no harm. 6 They were waiting for him
to become inflamed with a fever or to suddenly
drop dead. But after they watched him for a long
time and saw that nothing was unusual with him,
they changed their minds and said that he was a
god.
7 Now in a nearby place there were lands
belonging to the chief man of the island, a man
named Publius. He welcomed us and kindly
provided for us for three days. 8 It happened
that the father of Publius had been made ill with
a fever and dysentery. When Paul went to him,
he prayed, placed his hands on him, and healed
him. 9 After this happened, the rest of the people
on the island who were sick also came and were
healed. 10 The people also honored us with many
honors. When we were preparing to sail, they
gave us what we needed.
11 After three months we set sail in an ship
that had spent the winter at the island, a ship
of Alexandria, with “the twin gods” as it figurehead. 12 After we landed at the city of Syracuse,
we stayed there three days. 13 From there we

Acts 28:14

xc

Acts 28:22

sailed and arrived at the city of Rhegium. After
one day a south wind sprang up, and in two
days we came to the city of Puteoli. 14 There
we found some brothers and were invited to stay
with them for seven days. In this way we came
to Rome. 15 From there the brothers, after they
heard about us, came to meet us as far as The
Market of Appius and The Three Taverns. When
Paul saw the brothers, he thanked God and took
courage.
16 When we entered Rome, Paul was allowed
to live by himself with the soldier who was
guarding him.
17 Then it came about that after three days Paul
called together those men who were the leaders
among the Jews. When they had come together,
he said to them, “Brothers, although I have done
nothing wrong against the people or the customs
of our fathers, I was delivered as a prisoner from
Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans. 18 After
they questioned me, they wished to set me free,
because there was no reason in me for a death
penalty. 19 But when the Jews spoke against their
desire, I was forced to appeal to Caesar, although
it is not as if I were bringing any accusation
against my nation. 20 Because of my appeal, then,
I have asked to see you and to speak with you.
It is because of the certain hope of Israel that I
am bound with this chain.” 21 Then they said
to him, “We neither received letters from Judea
about you, nor did any of the brothers come and
report or say anything bad about you. 22 But we
want to hear from you what you think about this

Acts 28:23

xci

Acts 28:31

sect, because it is known by us that it is spoken
against everywhere.”
23 When they had set a day for him, more
people came to him at his dwelling place. He
presented the matter to them, and testified about
the kingdom of God. He tried to persuade them
about Jesus, both from the law of Moses and
from the prophets, from morning until evening.
24 Some were convinced about the things which
were said, while others did not believe. 25 When
they did not agree with one another, they left
after Paul had spoken this one word, “The Holy
Spirit spoke well through Isaiah the prophet to
your fathers. 26 He said, 'Go to this people and
say,
“By hearing you will hear, but not understand;
and seeing you will see, but will not perceive.
27 For the heart of this people has become dull,
and with their ears they hardly hear,
and they have shut their eyes.
Otherwise they might see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears,
and understand with their heart and turn again,
and I would heal them.”'
28 Therefore, you should know that this salvation
of God has been sent to the Gentiles, and they will
listen.” 29 *
30 Paul lived for two whole years in his own
rented house, and he welcomed all who came to
him. 31 He was proclaiming the kingdom of God
* 28:29 Acts 28:29 - Some ancient copies have vs. 29: When he
had said these things, the Jews went away. They were having a
great dispute among themselves .

Acts 28:31

xcii

Acts 28:31

and was teaching the things about the Lord Jesus
Christ with all boldness. No one stopped him.

xciii

Unlocked Literal Bible

The Holy Bible in English, Unlocked Literal Bible
translation
copyright © 2017 Door43 World Missions Community
Language: English
Translation by: Door43 World Missions Community
Contributor: 'Alrick G. Headley, M.Div., Th.M.', 'Adam W. Nagelvoort,
M.Div. Academic Ministries, Columbia International University', 'Dave
Statezni, BA Orig langs., M.Div. Fuller Theological Seminary', 'Bram van
den Heuvel, M.A.', 'C. Harry Harriss, M.Div.', 'David Trombold, M. Div.',
'Elizabeth Oakes, BA in Religious Studies, Linguistics', 'George "Drew"
Curley, M.Div., PhD, Professor of Biblical Languages', Hendrik "Henry" de
Vries, 'Henry Whitney, BA Linguistics', 'Jesse Griffin, BA Biblical Studies,
MA Biblical Languages', 'James N. Pohlig, M.Div., MA in Linguistics,
D. Litt. in Biblical Languages', 'Larry T Brooks, M.Div., Assemblies of
God Theological Seminary', 'Larry Sallee, D.Min.', 'Paul M Fahnestock,
M.Div. Reformed Theological Seminary, D. Min. Pittsburgh Theological
Seminary', 'Perry Oakes, PhD in Old Testament, MA in Linguistics', 'Peter
Smircich, BA Philosophy', 'Susan Quigley, MA in Linguistics', 'Thomas
Warren, M.Div., Trinity Evangelical Divinity School, D.Min, Reformed
Theological Seminary', 'Timothy Neu, Ph.D. Biblical Studies', 'Ward Pyles,
M.Div., Western Baptist Theological Seminary', David Trombold, Dean
Ropp, Gene Mullen, James Vigen, Leonard Smith, Nicholas Alsop, Michael
Francis
This is an open-licensed update of the ASV, intended to provide a 'formcentric' understanding of the Bible. It increases the translator's understanding of the lexical and grammatical composition of the underlying
text by adhering closely to the word order and structure of the originals.
This translation is made available to you under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Share-Alike license 4.0.
You have permission to share and redistribute this Bible translation in
any format and to make reasonable revisions and adaptations of this
translation, provided that:
You include the above copyright and source information.
If you make any changes to the text, you must indicate that you did
so in a way that makes it clear that the original licensor is not
necessarily endorsing your changes.

xciv
If you redistribute this text, you must distribute your contributions
under the same license as the original.
Pictures included with Scriptures and other documents on this site are
licensed just for use with those Scriptures and documents. For other uses,
please contact the respective copyright owners.
Note that in addition to the rules above, revising and adapting God's Word
involves a great responsibility to be true to God's Word. See Revelation
22:18-19.
2020-12-04
PDF generated using Haiola and XeLaTeX on 3 Mar 2023 from source files
dated 22 Nov 2019
d2521e10-6da3-5d98-a991-da7d3515afd5

