Ezekiel 1:1

i

Ezekiel 1:10

Ezekiel
1 In the thirtieth year, the fourth month, and

the fifth day of the month, it came about that
I was living among the captives by the Kebar
Canal. The heavens opened, and I saw visions of
God. 2 On the fifth day of that month—it was the
fifth year of the exile of King Jehoiachin— 3 the
word of Yahweh came to Ezekiel son of Buzi the
priest, in the land of the Chaldeans by the Kebar
Canal, and the hand of Yahweh was upon him
there.
4 Then I looked, and there was a windstorm
coming from the north; a great cloud with fire
flashing within it and brightness surrounding it
and inside of it, and the fire was the color of
amber inside the cloud. 5 In the middle was
the likeness of four living creatures. This was
their appearance: They had the likeness of a
man, 6 but they had four faces each, and each of
the creatures had four wings. 7 Their legs were
straight, but the soles of their feet were like the
hooves of a calf that shone like polished bronze.
8 Yet they had human hands under their wings on
all four sides. For all four, their faces and wings
were like this: 9 their wings were touching the
wings of the next creature, and they did not turn
as they went; instead, each one went straight
forward. 10 The likeness of their faces was like
the face of a man. The four of them had the face
of a lion to the right side, and the four of them
had the face of an ox on the left side. They four

Ezekiel 1:11

ii

Ezekiel 1:21

had also the face of an eagle. 11 Their faces were
like that, and their wings were spread out above,
so that each creature had a pair of wings that
touched another creature's wing, and also a pair
of wings that covered their bodies. 12 Each went
straight forward, so that wherever the Spirit
directed them to go, they went without turning.
13 As for the likeness of the living creatures,
their appearance was like burning coals of fire,
like the appearance of torches; bright fire also
moved about among the creatures, and there
were flashes of lightning. 14 The living creatures
were moving swiftly back and forth, and they
had the appearance of lightning!
15 Then I looked at the living creatures;

and
I saw one wheel on the ground beside each
of living creatures with its four faces. 16 This
was the appearance and structure of the wheels:
Each wheel was like beryl, and the four had the
same likeness; their appearance and structure
was like a wheel intersecting another wheel.
17 As they moved, they went in any of their four
directions, without turning as they went. 18 As
for their rims, they were high and fearsome,
for the rims were full of eyes round about.
19 Whenever the living creatures moved, the
wheels moved beside them. When the living
creatures rose up from the earth, the wheels also
rose up. 20 Wherever the Spirit would go, they
went, and the wheels rose up beside them, for
the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
21 Whenever the creatures moved, the wheels

Ezekiel 1:22

iii

Ezekiel 1:28

also moved; and when the creatures stood still,
the wheels stood still; when the creatures rose up
from the earth, the wheels rose up beside them,
because the spirit of the living creature was in
the wheels.
22 Over the heads of the living creatures was
the likeness of an expansive dome; it looked like
awe-inspiring crystal stretched out over their
heads above. 23 Beneath the dome, each one
of the creature's wings stretched out straight
and touched another creature's wings. Each of
the living creatures also had a pair to cover
themselves; each had a pair to cover his own
body. 24 Then I heard the sound of their wings.
Like the noise of many waters. Like the voice
of the Almighty whenever they moved. Like the
sound of a rainstorm. Like the sound of an army.
Whenever they stood still, they lowered their
wings. 25 A voice came from above the dome
over their heads whenever they stood still and
lowered their wings.
26 Above the dome over their heads was the
likeness of a throne that was like the appearance
of a sapphire stone, and on the likeness of the
throne was a likeness like the appearance of a
man. 27 I saw a figure with the appearance of
glowing metal with fire in it from the appearance
of his hips up; I saw from the appearance of
his hips downward the appearance of fire and
brightness all around. 28 Like the appearance of
a rainbow in the clouds on a rainy day was the
appearance of the bright light surrounding it. It
was the appearance of the likeness of the glory

Ezekiel 2:1

iv

Ezekiel 2:10

of Yahweh. When I saw it, I fell on my face, and
I heard a voice speaking.

2

1 He said to me, “Son of man, stand up on your
feet; then I will speak to you.” 2 Then, as he spoke

to me, the Spirit entered into me and set me on
my feet, and I heard him speaking to me. 3 He
said to me, “Son of man, I am sending you to
the people of Israel, to rebellious nations that
have rebelled against me—both they and their
ancestors have sinned against me up to this very
day! 4 Their descendants have stubborn faces
and hard hearts. I am sending you to them,
and you will say to them, 'This is what the Lord
Yahweh says.' 5 Either they will listen or they will
not listen. They are a rebellious house, but they
will at least know that a prophet has been among
them. 6 You, son of man, do not be afraid of
them or their words. Do not be afraid, although
you are with briers and thorns and although you
live with scorpions. Do not fear their words
or be dismayed by their faces, since they are a
rebellious house. 7 But you will speak my words
to them, whether they listen or not, because they
are most rebellious.
8 But you, son of man, listen to what I am
saying to you. Do not be rebellious like that
rebellious house. Open your mouth and eat what
I am about to give to you!” 9 Then I looked, and a
hand was extended out to me; in it was a written
scroll. 10 He spread it out before me; it had been

Ezekiel 3:1

v

Ezekiel 3:11

written on both its front and back, and written
on it were lamentations, mourning, and woe.

3

1 He said to me, “Son of man, what you have

found, eat. Eat this scroll, then go speak to the
house of Israel.” 2 So I opened my mouth, and he
fed me that scroll. 3 He said to me, “Son of man,
feed your belly and fill your stomach with this
scroll that I have given to you!” So I ate it, and
it was as sweet as honey in my mouth.
4 Then he said to me, “Son of man, go to the
house of Israel and speak my words to them.
5 For you are not being sent to a people of strange
speech or difficult language, but to the house of
Israel— 6 not to many peoples of strange speech
or a difficult language, whose words you cannot
understand. Surely if I sent you to them, they
would have listened to you. 7 But the house
of Israel will not be willing to listen to you,
for they are not willing to listen to me. So all
the house of Israel is strong browed and hard
hearted. 8 Behold! I have made your face as
stubborn as their faces and your brow as hard
as their brows. 9 I have made your brow like a
diamond, harder than flint! Do not fear them or
be discouraged by their faces, since they are a
rebellious house.” 10 Then he said to me, “Son of
man, all the words that I announce to you—take
them into your heart and hear them with your
ears! 11 Then go to the captives, to your people,
and speak to them. Say to them, 'This is what

Ezekiel 3:12

vi

Ezekiel 3:20

the Lord Yahweh says,' whether they will listen
or not.”
12 Then the Spirit lifted me up, and I heard
behind me the sound of a great earthquake:
“Blessed be the glory of Yahweh from his place!”
13 It was the sound of the wings of the living
creatures as they touched one another, and the
sound of the wheels that were with them, and
the sound of a great earthquake. 14 The Spirit
lifted me up and took me away, and I went with
bitterness in my spirit's rage, for the hand of
Yahweh was powerfully pressing on me! 15 So I
went to the captives at Tel Aviv who lived along
the Kebar Canal, and I stayed there among them
for seven days, overwhelmed in amazement.
16 Then it happened after seven days that the
word of Yahweh came to me, saying, 17 “Son of
man, I have made you a watchman for the house
of Israel, so listen to the word from my mouth,
and give them my warning. 18 When I say to the
wicked, 'You will surely die' and you do not warn
him or speak a warning to the wicked about his
evil deeds so he might live—the wicked one will
die for his sin, but I will require his blood from
your hand. 19 But if you warn the wicked, and
he does not turn from his wickedness or from
his wicked deeds, then he will die for his sin,
but you will have rescued your own life. 20 If a
righteous man turns from his righteousness and
acts unjustly, and I set a stumbling block before
him, he will die. Because you did not warn him,
he will die in his sin, and I will not call to mind
the righteous deeds that he performed, but I will

Ezekiel 3:21

vii

Ezekiel 4:3

require his blood from your hand. 21 But if you
warn the righteous man to stop sinning so that
he no longer sins, he will surely live since he was
warned; and you will have rescued your own
life.”
22 So the hand of Yahweh was on me there, and
he said to me, “Arise! Go out into the plain, and
I will speak with you there!” 23 I arose and went
out into the plain, and there the glory of Yahweh
was staying, like the glory that I had seen beside
the Kebar Canal; so I fell on my face. 24 The Spirit
came to me and stood me up on my feet; and
he spoke with me, and said to me, “Go and shut
yourself up within your house, 25 for now, son of
man, they will place ropes upon you and tie you
so you cannot go out among them. 26 I will make
your tongue stick to the roof of your mouth, so
you will be mute, and you will not be able to
rebuke them, since they are a rebellious house.
27 But when I speak with you, I will open your
mouth so you will say to them, 'This is what the
Lord Yahweh says.' The one who will hear will
hear; the one who will not listen will not listen,
for they are a rebellious house!”

4

1 “But you, son of man, take a brick for yourself

and place it before you. Then carve the city
of Jerusalem on it. 2 Then lay siege against it,
and build forts against it. Raise up an assault
ramp against it and set camps around it. Place
battering rams all around it. 3 Then take for
yourself an iron pan and use it as an iron wall

Ezekiel 4:4

viii

Ezekiel 4:13

between yourself and the city and set your face
against it, for it will be under siege, and you are
to put the siege against it. This will be a sign to
the house of Israel.
4 Then, lie on your left side and put the sin
of the house of Israel on it; you will carry their
sin for the number of the days that you lie
down against the house of Israel. 5 I myself am
assigning to you one day to represent each year
of their punishment: 390 days! In this way, you
will carry the sin of the house of Israel. 6 When
you have completed these days, then lie down a
second time on your right side, for you will carry
the sin of the house of Judah for forty days. I
am assigning to you one day for each year. 7 Set
your face toward Jerusalem that is under siege,
and with your arm uncovered prophesy against
it. 8 For behold! I am placing bonds on you so
you will not turn from one side to the other until
you have completed the days of your siege.
9 Take for yourself wheat, barley, beans, lentils,
millet, and spelt; put them in a single container
and make bread for yourself according to the
number of the days that you will lie upon your
side. For 390 days you will eat it. 10 The food you
will eat will be by weight, twenty shekels per day,
and you will eat it at set times each day. 11 Then
you will drink water, measured out to a sixth of
a hin, and you will drink it at set times. 12 You
will eat it as barley cakes, but you will bake it on
excrement of human dung within their sight!”
13 For Yahweh says, “This means that the bread
that the people of Israel will eat will be unclean,

Ezekiel 4:14

ix

Ezekiel 5:5

there among the nations where I will banish
them.” 14 But I said, “Alas, Lord Yahweh! I have
never been unclean! I have never eaten either
anything that died or anything killed by animals,
from my youth until now, and foul meat has
never entered my mouth!” 15 So he said to me,
“Look! I have given you cow manure instead of
human dung so you can prepare your bread over
that.” 16 He also said to me, “Son of man! Behold!
I am breaking the staff of bread in Jerusalem,
and they will eat bread while rationing it in
anxiety and drink water while rationing it in
trembling. 17 Because they will lack bread and
water, every man will be dismayed at his brother
and waste away because of their iniquity.”

5

1 “Then you, son of man, take a sharp sword as

a barber's razor for yourself, and pass the razor
over your head and your beard, then take scales
to weigh and divide your hair. 2 Burn a third of it
with fire in the midst of the city when the days of
the siege are completed, and take a third of the
hair and strike it with the sword all around the
city. Then scatter a third of it to the wind, and I
will draw out a sword to chase after the people.
3 But take a small number of hairs from them
and tie them into the folds of your robe. 4 Then
take more of the hair and throw it into the midst
of the fire; and burn it in the fire; from there a
fire will go out to all the house of Israel.”
5 The Lord Yahweh says this, “This is Jerusalem
in the midst of the nations, where I have placed

Ezekiel 5:6

x

Ezekiel 5:13

her, and where I have surrounded her with other
lands. 6 But she has in wickedness rejected my
decrees more than the nations have, and my
statutes more than the countries that surround
her. The people have rejected my judgments and
have not walked in my statutes.” 7 Therefore the
Lord Yahweh says this, “Because you are more
troublesome than the nations that surround you
and have not walked in my statutes or acted
according to my decrees, or even acted according
to the decrees of the nations that surround you,”
8 therefore the Lord Yahweh says this, “Behold!
I myself will act against you. I will execute
judgments within your midst for the nations to
see. 9 I will do to you what I have not done and
the like of which I will not do again, because of
all your disgusting actions. 10 Therefore fathers
will eat the children in your midst, and sons will
eat their fathers, since I will execute judgment
on you and scatter to every direction all of you
who are left. 11 Therefore, as I live—this is
the Lord Yahweh's declaration—it is certainly
because you have defiled my sanctuary with all
your hateful things and with all your disgusting
deeds, that I myself will reduce you in number;
my eye will not have pity on you, and I will not
spare you. 12 A third of you will die by plague,
and they will be consumed by famine in your
midst. A third will fall by the sword surrounding
you. Then I will scatter a third in every direction,
and draw out a sword to chase after them as well.
13 Then my wrath will be completed, and I will
cause my fury toward them to rest. I will be

Ezekiel 5:14

xi

Ezekiel 6:5

satisfied, and they will know that I, Yahweh, have
spoken in my wrath when I have completed my
fury against them. 14 I will make you a desolation
and a reproach to the nations that surround
you in the sight of everyone who passes by.
15 So Jerusalem will become something for other
people to condemn and to mock, a warning and
a horror to the nations that surround you. I
will execute judgments against you in wrath and
fury, and with a furious rebuke—I, Yahweh have
declared this! 16 I will send out harsh arrows of
famine against you that will become the means
with which I will destroy you. For I will increase
the famine on you and break your staff of bread.
17 I will send a famine and disasters against
you so you will be childless. Plague and blood
will pass through you, and I will bring a sword
against you—I, Yahweh, have declared this.”
1 The

6

word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, set your face against the mountains of Israel and prophesy to them. 3 Say,
'Mountains of Israel, listen to the word of the
Lord Yahweh! The Lord Yahweh says this to the
mountains and to the hills, to the streambeds,
and to the valleys: Behold! I am bringing a
sword against you, and I will destroy your high
places. 4 Then your altars will become desolate
and your pillars will be destroyed, and I will
throw down your dead in front of their idols. 5 I
will lay the dead bodies of the people of Israel
before their idols, and scatter your bones around

Ezekiel 6:6

xii

Ezekiel 6:13

your altars. 6 Everywhere you live, cities will be
laid waste and the high places ruined, so that
your altars will be laid waste and made desolate.
Then they will be broken and disappear, your
pillars will be cut down and your works will be
wiped away. 7 The dead will fall down in your
midst and you will know that I am Yahweh.
8 But I will preserve a remnant among you, and
there will be some who escape the sword among
the nations, when you are scattered throughout
the countries. 9 Then those who escape will
think of me among the nations where they will
be held captive, that I was grieved by their
promiscuous heart that turned away from me,
and by their eyes that whored after their idols.
Then they will show loathing on their face for
the wickedness which they have committed with
all their abominations. 10 So they will know that
I am Yahweh. It was for a reason that I said I
would bring this evil to them.
11 The Lord Yahweh says this: Clap your hands
and stomp your foot! Say, 'Alas!' because of
all the evil abominations of the house of Israel!
For they will fall by sword, famine, and plague.
12 The one far away will die by plague, and the
one who is near will fall by the sword. Those
who remain and survive will die by famine. In
this way I will accomplish my fury against them.
13 Then you will know that I am Yahweh, when
their dead lie among their idols, around their
altars, on every high hill—on all the mountain
peaks, and under every flourishing tree and
thick oak—the places where they burned incense

Ezekiel 6:14

xiii

Ezekiel 7:7

to all their idols. 14 I will strike with my hand and
make the land desolate and a waste, from the
wilderness to Diblah, throughout all the places
where they live. Then they will know that I am
Yahweh.” *
1 The

7

word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
2 “You, son of man—the Lord Yahweh says this
to the land of Israel.”
'An end! An end has come to the four borders of
the land.
3 Now the end is upon you, for I am sending
out my wrath on you, and I will judge you
according to your ways;
then I will bring all your abominations upon you.
4 For my eyes will not pity you, and I will not
spare you. Instead, I will bring your ways
upon you,
and your abominations will be in your midst, so
you will know that I am Yahweh.
5 The Lord Yahweh says this:
Disaster! A unique disaster! Behold, it is coming.
*
6 An end is surely coming. The end has woken
up against you. Behold, it is coming!
7 Your doom is coming to you who inhabit the
land.
The time has come; the day of destruction is near,
and the mountains will no longer be joyful.
* 6:14

Instead of Diblah , some ancient copies and modern

* 7:5 Instead of Disaster! A unique
versions have Riblah .
disaster! some ancient copies have Disaster after disaster

Ezekiel 7:8

xiv

Ezekiel 7:15

8 Now before long I will pour out my fury against

you and fill up my wrath upon you
when I judge you according to your ways and
bring all your abominations upon you.
9 For my eye will not look compassionately, and
I will not spare you. As you have done, I
will do to you;
and your abominations will be in your midst so
you will know that I am Yahweh, the one
punishing you.
10 Behold, the day! Behold, it is coming!
Doom has gone out! The rod has blossomed,
arrogance has budded!
11 Violence has grown up into a rod of wickedness—
none of them, and none of their multitude,
none of their wealth, and none of their
importance will last!
12 The time is coming; the day has come close.
Do not let the buyer rejoice,
nor the seller mourn, since my anger is on the
entire multitude!
13 For the seller will not return to the land he sold
as long as they both live,
because the vision concerning the entire multitude will not be reversed;
and because of their sins, none of them will be
strengthened!
14 They have blown the trumpet and made
everything ready, but there is no one
marching to battle;
since my anger is on the entire multitude.
15 The sword is on the outside, and plague and
famine are inside the building.

Ezekiel 7:16

xv

Ezekiel 7:22

Those who are in the field will die by the sword,
while famine and plague will consume
those in the city.
16 But some survivors will escape from among
them, and they will go to the mountains.
Like doves of the valleys, all of them will moan—
each man for his iniquity.
17 Every hand will falter and every knee will be
weak as water,
18 and they will wear sackcloth, and terror will
cover them;
and shame will be on every face, and baldness
on all of their heads.
19 They will throw their silver into the streets and
their gold will be like refuse. Their silver
and their gold
will not be able to rescue them in the day of
Yahweh's rage. Their lives will not be
saved,
and their hunger will not be satisfied, because
their iniquity has become a stumbling
block.
20 In their pride they took the beauty of his
jeweled ornaments, and with them they
made their idolatrous figures, and their
detestable things. Therefore, I am turning
these into an unclean thing to them.
21 Then I will give those things into the hand of
strangers as plunder and to the wicked of
the earth as plunder,
and they will defile them.
22 Then I will turn my face away from them when
they defile my cherished place;

Ezekiel 7:23

xvi

Ezekiel 8:2

bandits will enter it and defile it.
23 Make a chain, because the land is filled with
the judgment of blood,
and the city is full of violence.
24 So I will bring the most wicked of the nations,
and they will possess their houses,
and I will bring an end to the pride of the mighty,
for their holy places will be defiled!
25 Fear will come! They will seek peace, but there
will be none.
26 Disaster upon disaster will come, and there
will be rumor after rumor.
Then they will seek a vision from the prophet,
but the law will perish from the priest and
advice from the elders.
27 The king will mourn and the prince will dress
in despair,
while the hands of the people of the land will
tremble in fear. According to their own
ways I will do this to them!
I will judge them with their own standards until
they know that I am Yahweh.'”

8

1 So it came about in the sixth year and the

sixth month, in the fifth day of the month, as
I sat in my house and the elders of Judah sat
before me, that the hand of the Lord Yahweh
again fell upon me there. 2 So I looked, and
behold, there was a likeness with the appearance
of a man. From the appearance of his hips
downward there was fire. And from his hips
upward there was the appearance of something

Ezekiel 8:3

xvii

Ezekiel 8:11

shining, like glowing metal. 3 Then he reached
out the form of a hand and took me by the hair
of my head; the Spirit lifted me up between earth
and heaven, and in visions from God, he brought
me to Jerusalem, to the entrance of the inner
northern gate, where the idol that provokes great
jealousy was standing. 4 Then behold, the glory
of the God of Israel was there, according to the
vision I had seen on the plain.
5 Then he said to me, “Son of man, lift up your
eyes to the north.” So I lifted up my eyes to
the north, and to the north of the gate leading
to the altar, there in the entrance, was the idol
of jealousy. 6 So he said to me, “Son of man,
do you see what they are doing? These are
great abominations that the house of Israel is
doing here to make me go far from my own
sanctuary. But you will turn and see even
greater abominations.”
7 Then he brought me to the doorway of the
courtyard, and I looked, and there was a hole
in the wall. 8 He said to me, “Son of man, dig
into this wall.” So I dug into the wall, and there
was a door. 9 Then he said to me, “Go and
see the wicked abominations that they are doing
here.” 10 So I went in and looked, and behold!
There was every form of creeping thing and
detestable beast! Every idol of the house of Israel
was carved into the wall all around. 11 Seventy
elders of the house of Israel were there, and
Jaazaniah son of Shaphan was standing in their
midst. They were standing in front of the images,
and each man had his censer in his hand so that

Ezekiel 8:12

xviii

Ezekiel 9:1

the smell of the cloud of incense went up. 12 He
said to me, “Son of man, do you see what the
elders of the house of Israel are doing in the
dark? Each one does this in the hidden chamber
of his idol, for they say, 'Yahweh does not see
us! Yahweh has forsaken the land.'” 13 Then he
said to me, “Turn again and see the other great
abominations that they are doing.”
14 Next he brought me to the entrance of the
gate of Yahweh's house that was on the north
side, and behold! The women were sitting there
mourning for Tammuz. 15 So he said to me, “Do
you see this, son of man? Turn again and see
even greater abominations than these.”
16 He brought me into the inner courtyard of
Yahweh's house, and behold! at the entrance
of the temple of Yahweh between the portico
and the altar, there were about twenty-five men
with their backs toward the temple of Yahweh
and their faces toward the east, and they were
worshiping the sun. 17 He said to me, “Do you see
this, son of man? Is it a little thing for the house
of Judah to do these abominations that they are
doing here? For they have filled the land with
violence and they have turned again to provoke
me to anger, putting the branch to their noses.
18 So I will also act among them; my eye will
not have compassion, and I will not spare them.
Though they cry in my ears with a loud voice, I
will not hear them.”
1 Then

9

he cried in my hearing with a loud

Ezekiel 9:2

xix

Ezekiel 9:9

voice, and said, “Let the guards come up to the
city, each with his weapon of destruction in his
hand.” 2 Then behold! Six men came from the
pathway of the upper gate that faces north, each
with his weapon of slaughter in his hand. There
was a man in their midst dressed in linen with
a scribe's equipment at his side. So they went in
and stood beside the bronze altar.
3 Then the glory of the God of Israel went up
from the cherubim where it had been to the
threshold of the house. He called to the man
dressed in linen who had the scribe's equipment
at his side. 4 Yahweh said to him, “Pass through
the midst of the city—the midst of Jerusalem—
and make a mark on the foreheads of those who
groan and sigh about all the abominations being
performed in the midst of the city.” 5 Then he
spoke to the others within my hearing, “Pass
through the city after him and kill. Do not
let your eyes have compassion, and do not
spare 6 either old man, young man, virgin, little
children or women. Kill all of them! But do
not approach anyone who has the mark on his
head. Begin at my sanctuary!” So they began
with the elders who were in front of the house.
7 He said to them, “Defile the house, and fill its
courtyards with the dead. Proceed!” So they
went out and attacked the city. 8 As they were
attacking it, I found myself alone and I fell on my
face and cried out and said, “Ah, Lord Yahweh,
will you destroy all the remnant of Israel in the
outpouring of your wrath on Jerusalem?”
9 He said to me, “The iniquity of the house of
Israel and Judah is exceedingly great. The land

Ezekiel 9:10

xx

Ezekiel 10:7

is full of blood and the city full of perversions,
since they say, 'Yahweh has forgotten the land,'
and 'Yahweh does not see!' 10 So then, my eye will
not look with compassion, and I will not spare
them. I will instead bring it all on their heads.”
11 Behold! The man dressed in linen who had
the scribe's equipment by his side came back. He
reported and said, “I have done all that you have
commanded.”

10

1 As I looked toward the dome that was over

the heads of the cherubim; something appeared
above them like a sapphire with the appearance
of the likeness of a throne. 2 Then Yahweh
spoke to the man dressed in linen and said, “Go
between the wheels underneath the cherubim,
and fill both your hands with fiery coals from
between the cherubim and scatter them over
the city.” Then the man went in as I watched.
3 The cherubim stood on the right side of the
house when the man went in, and a cloud filled
the inner courtyard. 4 The glory of Yahweh
rose up from the cherubim and stood over the
threshold of the house. It filled the house with
the cloud, and the courtyard was full of the
brightness of Yahweh's glory. 5 The sound of
the cherubim's wings was heard as far as the
outer courtyard, like the voice of God Almighty
when he speaks. 6 It came about, when God
commanded the man dressed in linen and said,
“Take fire from between the wheels that are
between the cherubim,” the man went in and
stood beside a wheel. 7 A cherub reached out

Ezekiel 10:8

xxi

Ezekiel 10:17

his hand between the cherubim to the fire that
was among the cherubim, and lifted it up and
placed it into the hands of the one dressed in
linen. The man took it and went back out. 8 I saw
on the cherubim something like a man's hand
under their wings.
9 So I looked, and behold!

Four wheels were
beside the cherubim—one wheel beside each
cherub—and the appearance of the wheels was
like a beryl stone. 10 Their appearance was
the same likeness for all four of them, like a
wheel intersecting another wheel. 11 When they
moved, they went in any of their four directions,
without turning as they went; but whatever
direction the head faced, they followed after it
without turning as they went. 12 Their whole
body—including their backs, their hands, and
their wings—was covered with eyes, and eyes
covered the four wheels all around also. 13 As
I listened, the wheels were called, “Whirling.”
14 They had four faces each; the first face was the
face of a cherub, the second face was the face of
a man, the third the face of a lion, and the fourth
the face of an eagle.
15 Then the cherubim—these were the living

creatures that I had seen by the Kebar Canal—
rose up. 16 Whenever the cherubim moved, the
wheels would go beside them, and whenever the
cherubim lifted up their wings to rise up from
the earth, the wheels did not turn. They still
stayed beside them. 17 When the cherubim stood
still, the wheels stood still, and when they rose
up, the wheels rose up with them, for the spirit

Ezekiel 10:18

xxii

Ezekiel 11:5

of the living creature was in the wheels.
18 Then the glory of Yahweh went out from
over the threshold of the house and stood over
the cherubim. 19 The cherubim lifted up their
wings and rose from the earth in my sight when
they went out, and the wheels did the same
beside them. They stood at the eastern entrance
to Yahweh's house, and the glory of the God of
Israel came upon them from above.
20 These were the living creatures that I had
seen below the God of Israel by the Kebar Canal,
so I knew that they were cherubim! 21 They
had four faces each and four wings each, and
the likeness of human hands under their wings,
22 and the likeness of their faces was like the
faces that I had seen in the vision at the Kebar
Canal, and each of them went straight ahead.

11

1 Then the Spirit lifted me up and brought me

to the eastern gate of Yahweh's house, facing
east, and behold, in the doorway of the gate there
were twenty-five men. I saw Jaazaniah son of
Azzur and Pelatiah son of Benaiah, leaders of the
people, among them. 2 God said to me, “Son of
man, these are the men who devise iniquity, and
who decide wicked plans in this city. 3 They are
saying, 'The time to build houses is not now; this
city is the pot, and we are the meat.' 4 Therefore
prophesy against them. Prophesy, son of man.”
5 Then the Spirit of Yahweh fell on me and he
said for me to say: This is what Yahweh says,
“That is what you are saying, house of Israel;

Ezekiel 11:6

xxiii

Ezekiel 11:16

for I know what goes through your mind. 6 You
have multiplied the people you have killed in this
city and filled its streets with them. 7 Therefore,
the Lord Yahweh says this: The people you have
killed, whose bodies you have laid in the midst of
Jerusalem, are the meat, and this city is the pot.
But you are going to be brought out from the
midst of this city. 8 You have feared the sword,
so I am bringing the sword upon you—this is the
declaration of the Lord Yahweh. 9 I will bring
you out of the midst of the city, and put you into
the hands of foreigners, for I will bring judgment
against you. 10 You will fall by the sword. I will
judge you within the borders of Israel so you will
know that I am Yahweh. 11 This city will not
be your cooking pot, nor will you be the meat
within her midst. I will judge you within the
borders of Israel. 12 Then you will know that
I am Yahweh, the one whose statutes you have
not walked in and whose decrees you have not
carried out. Instead, you have carried out the
decrees of the nations that surround you.”
13 It came about that as I was prophesying,
Pelatiah son of Benaiah, died. So I fell on my face
and cried out with a loud voice and said, “Alas,
Lord Yahweh, will you completely destroy the
remnant of Israel?” 14 The word of Yahweh came
to me, saying, 15 “Son of man, your brothers!
Your brothers! The men of your clan and all the
house of Israel! All of them are those of whom
it is said by those living in Jerusalem, 'They are
far away from Yahweh! This land was given
to us as our possession.' 16 Therefore say, 'The

Ezekiel 11:17

xxiv

Ezekiel 11:25

Lord Yahweh says this: Though I have removed
them far off among the nations, and though I
have scattered them among the lands, yet I have
been a sanctuary for them for a little while in
the lands where they have gone.' 17 Therefore
say, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: I will gather
you from the peoples, and assemble you from
the lands where you were scattered, and I will
give you the land of Israel.' 18 Then they will
go there and remove every detestable thing and
every abomination from that place. 19 I will give
them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within
them. I will take out the heart of stone from their
flesh and give them a heart of flesh, 20 so that
they will walk in my statutes, they will carry out
my decrees and do them. Then they will be my
people, and I will be their God. 21 But to those
who walk with affection toward their detestable
things and their abominations, I will bring their
conduct on their own heads—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration.”
22 The cherubim lifted up their wings and the

wheels that were beside them, and the glory of
the God of Israel was high up over them. 23 Then
the glory of Yahweh went up from within the
midst of the city and stood on the mountain to
the east of the city. 24 The Spirit lifted me up
and brought me into Chaldea, to the exiles, in
the vision from the Spirit of God, and the vision
that I had seen went up from upon me. 25 Then
I declared to the exiles all the things of Yahweh
that I had seen.

Ezekiel 12:1

1 The

xxv

12

Ezekiel 12:11

word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, you live in the midst of a
rebellious house, where they have eyes to see
but they do not see; and where they have ears
to hear but do not listen, because they are a
rebellious house. 3 Therefore as for you, son of
man, prepare your things for exile, and begin
going out by day in their sight, for I will exile you
in their sight from your place to another place.
Perhaps they will begin to see, though they are a
rebellious house. 4 You will bring out your things
for an exile in the day in their sight; go out in
the evening in their sight in the way that anyone
goes into exile. 5 Dig a hole through the wall in
their sight, and go out through it. 6 In their sight,
lift up your things onto your shoulder, and bring
them out in the darkness. Cover your face, for
you must not see the land, since I have set you
as a sign to the house of Israel.”
7 So I did this, just as I was commanded. I
brought out my things of exile in the daytime,
and in the evening I dug a hole through the wall
by hand. I brought my things out in the dark,
and lifted them up on my shoulder in their sight.
8 Then the word of Yahweh came to me in the
morning, saying, 9 “Son of man, is the house of
Israel, that rebellious house, not asking, 'What
are you doing?' 10 Say to them, 'The Lord Yahweh
says this: this prophetic action concerns the
prince in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel
in whose midst they are.' 11 Say, 'I am a sign to
you.' As I have done, so it will be done to them;

Ezekiel 12:12

xxvi

Ezekiel 12:20

they will go into exile and into captivity. 12 The
prince who is among them will lift up his things
upon his shoulder in the dark, and will go out
through the wall. They will dig through the wall
and bring out their things. He will cover his face,
so he will not see the land with his eyes. 13 I will
spread out my net over him and he will be caught
in my snare; then I will bring him to Babylon,
the land of the Chaldeans, but he will not see it.
He will die there. 14 I will also scatter in every
direction all of those around him who were to
assist him and his entire army, and I will send
out a sword after them. 15 Then they will know
that I am Yahweh, when I scatter them among
the nations and disperse them throughout the
lands. 16 But I will spare a few men from among
them from the sword, famine, and plague, so
they may record all of their abominations in the
lands where I take them, so they will know that
I am Yahweh.”
17 The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, eat your bread with trembling,

and drink your water with shaking and worry.
19 Then say to the people of the land, 'The Lord
Yahweh says this concerning the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and the land of Israel, “They will eat
their bread with trembling and drink their water
while shaking, since the land will be despoiled
of its fullness because of the violence of all
those who live there. 20 So the cities that were
inhabited will be desolate, and the land will
become a wasteland; so you will know that I am
Yahweh.”'”

Ezekiel 12:21

xxvii

Ezekiel 13:3

21 Again the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 22 “Son of man, what is this proverb

that you have in the land of Israel that says,
'The days are prolonged, and every vision fails'?
23 Therefore, say to them, 'The Lord Yahweh says
this: I will put an end to this proverb, and the
people of Israel will no longer use it.' Say to
them, 'The days have drawn near when every
vision will be fulfilled. 24 For there will no longer
be any false visions or favorable divinations
within the house of Israel. 25 For I am Yahweh!
I speak, and I carry out the words that I speak.
The matter will no longer be delayed. For I will
speak this word in your days, rebellious house,
and I will carry it out!—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.'”
26 Again the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 27 “Son of man! Behold, the house of
Israel has said, 'The vision that he sees is for
many days from now, and he prophesies of far
off times.' 28 Therefore say to them, 'The Lord
Yahweh says this: My words will not be delayed
any longer, but the word that I have spoken will
be done—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.'”

13

1 Again, the word of
saying, 2 “Son of man,

Yahweh came to me,
prophesy against the
prophets who are prophesying in Israel, and say
to those who are prophesying out of their own
imaginations, 'Listen to the word of Yahweh.
3 The Lord Yahweh says this: Woe to the foolish
prophets who follow their own spirit, but who

Ezekiel 13:4

xxviii

Ezekiel 13:12

4 Israel, your prophets
have seen nothing!
have been like jackals in the wastelands. 5 You
have not gone to the breaks in the wall around
the house of Israel in order to repair it, in
order to resist in battle on the day of Yahweh.
6 The people have false visions and make false
predictions, those who say, “Such and such is
Yahweh's declaration.” Yahweh has not sent
them, but they nevertheless have made people
hope that their messages would come true.
7 Have you not had false visions and made false
predictions, you who say, “Such and such is
Yahweh's declaration” when I myself have not
spoken?'
8 Therefore

the Lord Yahweh says this, 'Because you have had false visions and have
told lies—therefore this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration against you: 9 My hand will be
against the prophets who have lying visions and
who make false predictions. They will not be in
the assembly of my people, or enrolled in the
record of the house of Israel; they must not go
to the land of Israel. For you will know that I am
the Lord Yahweh! 10 Because of this, and because
they led my people astray and said, “Peace!”
when there is no peace, they are building a wall
that they will paint with whitewash.' 11 Say to
those who are whitewashing the wall, 'It will fall
down; there will be a downpour of rain, and I
will send hailstones to make it fall down, and a
windstorm wind to break it down. 12 See, the
wall will fall down. Have others not said to you,
“Where is the whitewash that you put on it?”

Ezekiel 13:13

xxix

Ezekiel 13:20

13 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this:

I will
bring a windstorm in my rage, and there will be
floods of rain in my wrath! Hailstones in my rage
will completely destroy it. 14 For I will tear down
the wall that you have covered with whitewash,
and I will demolish it to the ground and lay bare
its foundations. So it will fall, and you will be
annihilated in the middle of it all. Then you will
know that I am Yahweh. 15 For I will annihilate in
my fury the wall and those who whitewashed it.
I will say to you, “The wall exists no more, nor do
the people who whitewashed it— 16 the prophets
of Israel who prophesied about Jerusalem and
who had visions of peace for her. But there is no
peace!—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.”'
17 So you, son of man, set your face against
the daughters of your people who prophesy out
of their own minds, and prophesy against them.
18 Say, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: Woe to the
women who sew magic charms onto every part
of their hand and make veils for their heads of
every size, used to hunt down people. Will you
hunt down my people but save your own lives?
19 You have profaned me among my people for
handfuls of barley and crumbs of bread, to kill
people who should not die, and to preserve the
lives of those who should not continue to live,
because of your lies to my people who heard you.
20 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this: I am
against the magic charms that you have used to
ensnare the people's lives as if they were birds.
Indeed, I will tear them from your arms; and the
people whom you have trapped like birds—I will

Ezekiel 13:21

xxx

Ezekiel 14:6

let them go free. 21 I will tear away your veils and
rescue my people from your hand, so they will no
longer be trapped in your hands. You will know
that I am Yahweh. 22 Because you discourage
the heart of the righteous person with lies, even
though I did not desire his discouragement, and
because you encourage instead the actions of the
wicked person so that he will not turn from his
way to save his life— 23 therefore you will no
longer have false visions or continue to make
predictions, for I will rescue my people out of
your hand. You will know that I am Yahweh.'”

14

1 Some of the elders of Israel came to me and
sat before me. 2 Then the word of Yahweh came
to me, saying, 3 “Son of man, these men have

taken their idols into their hearts and have put
the stumbling block of their iniquity before their
own faces. Should I be inquired of at all by them?
4 Therefore announce this to them and say to
them, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: Every man
of the house of Israel who takes his idols into
his heart, or who puts the stumbling block of his
iniquity before his face, and who then comes to a
prophet—I, Yahweh, will answer him according
to the number of his idols. 5 I will do this so that I
may take back the house of Israel in their hearts
that have been driven far from me through their
idols.'
6 Therefore say to the house of Israel, 'The Lord
Yahweh says this: Repent and turn away from
your idols! Turn back your faces from all your

Ezekiel 14:7

xxxi

Ezekiel 14:15

abominations. 7 For every one from the house
of Israel and every one of the foreigners staying
in Israel who deserts me, who takes his idols
into his heart and puts the stumbling block of
his iniquity before his own face, and who then
comes to a prophet to seek me—I, Yahweh, will
answer him myself. 8 So I will set my face against
that man and make him a sign and a proverb, for
I will cut him off from the midst of my people,
and you will know that I am Yahweh. 9 If a
prophet is deceived and speaks a message, then
I, Yahweh, will deceive that prophet; I will reach
out with my hand against him and destroy him
from the midst of my people Israel. 10 They
will carry their own iniquity; the iniquity of
the prophet will be the same as the iniquity of
the one who inquires from him. 11 Because of
this, the house of Israel will no longer wander
away from following me nor defile themselves
any longer through all their transgressions. They
will be my people, and I will be their God—this
is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.'”
12 Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 13 “Son of man, when a land sins against

me by committing a sin so that I reach out with
my hand against it and break the staff of its
bread, and send out over it a famine and cut
off both man and beast from the land; 14 then
even if these three men—Noah, Daniel, and Job—
were in the land's midst, they could only rescue
their own lives by their righteousness—this is
the Lord Yahweh's declaration. 15 If I send evil
beasts through the land and make it barren so

Ezekiel 14:16

xxxii

Ezekiel 14:23

that it becomes a wasteland where no man may
pass through because of the beasts, 16 then even
if these same three men were in it—as I live,
declares the Lord Yahweh—they would not be
able to rescue even their own sons or daughters;
only their own lives would be rescued, but the
land would become a wasteland. 17 Or if I bring
a sword against that land and say, 'Sword, go
through the land and cut off both man and beast
from it', 18 then even if these three men were
in the midst of the land—as I live, declares the
Lord Yahweh—they would not be able to rescue
even their own sons or daughters; only their own
lives would be rescued. 19 Or if I send a plague
against this land and pour out my fury against it
through bloodshed, in order to cut off both man
and beast, 20 then even if Noah, Daniel, and Job
were in that land—as I live, declares the Lord
Yahweh—they would not be able to rescue even
their own sons or daughters; only their own lives
would be rescued by their righteousness.
21 For the Lord Yahweh says this:
I will
certainly make things worse by sending my four
punishments—famine, sword, wild animals, and
plague—against Jerusalem to cut off both man
and beast from her. 22 Yet, behold! A remnant
will be left in her, survivors who will go out with
sons and daughters. Behold! They will go out to
you, and you will see their ways and actions and
be comforted concerning the punishment that
I have sent to Jerusalem, and about everything
else that I have sent against the land. 23 The
survivors will comfort you when you see their

Ezekiel 15:1

xxxiii

Ezekiel 16:3

ways and their actions, so you will know all these
things I have done against her, that I have not
done them in vain!—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.”

15

1 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

2 “Son of man,

how is a vine better than any
tree with branches that is among the trees in a
forest? 3 Do people take wood from a vine to
make anything? Or do they make a peg from it
to hang anything on it? 4 See! If it is thrown
into a fire as fuel, and if the fire has burned both
of its ends and also the middle, is it good for
anything? 5 See! When it was complete, it could
not make anything; surely then, when the fire
has burned, then it still will not make anything
useful. 6 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this:
Unlike the trees in the forests, I have given the
vine as fuel for fires; I will act in the same way
toward the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 7 For I will
set my face against them. Though they come out
from the fire, yet the fire will consume them;
so you will know that I am Yahweh, when I set
my face against them. 8 Then I will make the
land into an abandoned wasteland because they
have committed sin—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.”

16

1 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

of man, inform Jerusalem about her
abominations, 3 and declare, 'The Lord Yahweh
says this to Jerusalem: Your beginning and your
2 “Son

Ezekiel 16:4

xxxiv

Ezekiel 16:11

birth took place in the land of Canaan; your
father was an Amorite, and your mother was a
Hittite. 4 On the day of your birth, your mother
did not cut your navel, nor did she purify you
in water or rub you down with salt, or wrap
cloth around you. 5 No eye had compassion for
you to do any of these things for you, to be
compassionate toward you. On the day that you
were born, with loathing for your life, you were
thrown out into the open field.
6 But I passed by you, and I saw you writhing
in your own blood; so I said to you in your
blood, “Live!” I said to you in your blood,
“Live!” * 7 I made you grow like a plant in
a field. You multiplied and became great, and
you became the jewel of jewels. Your breasts
became firm, and your hair grew thick, though
you had been naked and bare. 8 I passed by
you again, and I saw you. See! the time of
love came for you, so I spread my robe over
you and covered your nakedness. Then I swore
to you and brought you into a covenant—this is
the Lord Yahweh's declaration—and you became
mine. 9 So I washed you with water and rinsed
your blood off you, and I anointed you with
oil. 10 I dressed you in embroidered clothes and
placed leather sandals on your feet. I wrapped
you with fine linen and covered you with silk.
11 Next I adorned you with jewelry, and I put
bracelets on your hands, and a chain around
* 16:6 Some modern versions leave out the second occurrence
of I said to you in your blood, “Live!” .

Ezekiel 16:12

xxxv

Ezekiel 16:21

your neck. 12 I put a nose ring in your nostrils
and earrings in your ears, and a beautiful crown
on your head. 13 So you were adorned with gold
and silver, and you were dressed in fine linen,
silk, and embroidered clothes; you ate fine flour,
honey, and oil, and you were very beautiful, and
you became a queen. 14 Your fame went out
among the nations because of your beauty, for
it was perfect in the majesty that I had given to
you—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.
15 But you trusted in your own beauty, and you

acted like a prostitute because of your fame; you
poured out your acts of prostitution on everyone
who passed by, so that your beauty became his.
16 Then you took your clothes and with them
you made high places for yourself decorated
in various colors, and there you acted like a
prostitute. This should not have happened. Nor
should such a thing exist. 17 You took the fine
jewels of the gold and silver that I gave you,
and you made for yourself male figures, and you
did with them as a prostitute would do. 18 You
took your embroidered garments and covered
them, and you set my oils and perfumes before
them. 19 My bread I gave you—made with fine
flour, oil, and honey—you set before them for a
fragrant aroma, for this is what happened—this
is the Lord Yahweh's declaration. 20 Then you
took your sons and daughters whom you bore for
me, and you sacrificed them to the images to be
devoured as food. Are your acts of prostitution
a small matter? 21 You slaughtered my children

Ezekiel 16:22

xxxvi

Ezekiel 16:31

to the idols and made them pass through the
fire. 22 In all your abominations and your acts
of prostitution you have not thought about the
days of your youth, when you were naked and
bare as you thrashed about in your blood.
23 Woe!

Woe to you!—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—therefore, in addition to all
this wickedness, 24 you built yourself a vaulted
chamber in every public place. 25 You built your
high place at the head of every road and made
your beauty a disgrace, and you spread your legs
to anyone who passed by, and you multiplied
your acts of prostitution. 26 You have acted
like a prostitute with the Egyptians, your lustful
neighbors, and you committed many more acts
of prostitution, provoking me to anger. 27 See!
I will strike you with my hand and cut off
your food. I will hand your life over to your
enemies, the daughters of the Philistines, who
were ashamed of your obscene behavior. 28 You
have acted like a prostitute with the Assyrians
because you could not be satisfied. You acted like
a prostitute and still were not satisfied. 29 You
performed many more acts of prostitution in the
land of the merchants of Chaldea, and even this
did not satisfy you.
30 How sick is your heart—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration—that you would do all
these things, deeds of a shameless prostitute?
31 You have built your high places at the head
of every street and made your vaulted chamber
in every public place. Yet you were not like a

Ezekiel 16:32

xxxvii

Ezekiel 16:41

prostitute because you refused to take payment.
32 You adulterous woman, you accept strangers
instead of your husband. 33 People give payment
to every prostitute, but you give your wages to
all your lovers and bribe them to come to you
from all around for your acts of prostitution.
34 So there is a difference between you and those
other women, since no one goes to you to ask you
to sleep with them. Instead, you pay them. No
one pays you.
35 Therefore, you prostitute, listen to the word
36 The Lord Yahweh says this:
of Yahweh.
Because you have poured out your lust and
uncovered your nakedness through your acts of
prostitution with your lovers and with all your
detestable idols, and because you gave them
your children's blood, 37 therefore, behold, I will
gather all your lovers that you have met, all
those whom you loved and all those whom you
hated, and I will gather them against you on
every side. I will uncover your nakedness to
them so they see all your nakedness. 38 For I
will punish you for adultery and the shedding of
blood, and I will bring on you the bloodshed of
my anger and passion. 39 I will give you into their
hands so they will throw down your vaulted
chamber and break down your high places and
they will strip you of your clothes and take all
of your jewelry. They will leave you naked and
bare. 40 Then they will bring up a crowd against
you and stone you with stones, and they will
cut you apart with their swords. 41 They will
burn your houses and will perform many acts of

Ezekiel 16:42

xxxviii

Ezekiel 16:49

punishment on you in the sight of many women,
for I will put a stop to your prostitution, and you
will no longer pay your lovers. 42 Then I will calm
my fury against you; my anger will leave you, for
I will be satisfied, and will no longer be angry.
43 Because you did not call to mind the days of
your youth and have made me shake with anger
because of all these things, therefore, behold!
I myself will bring down on your own head
the punishment for what you have done—this
is the Lord Yahweh's declaration. Have you not
added prostitution to all your other detestable
practices?
44 Behold!

Everyone who speaks proverbs
concerning you will say, “As the mother is, so
also is her daughter.” 45 You are the daughter of
your mother, who detested her husband and her
children, and you are the sister of your sisters
who detested their husbands and their children.
Your mother was a Hittite, and your father was
an Amorite. 46 Your older sister was Samaria and
her daughters were the ones living in the north,
while your younger sister was the one living
south of you, that is, Sodom and her daughters.
47 You not only walked in their ways and copied
their behavior and practices, but in all your ways
you have been worse than they were. 48 As
I live—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—
your sister Sodom and her daughters, have not
done as much evil as you and your daughters
have done. 49 Behold! This was the sin of
your sister Sodom that she was arrogant in
her leisure, careless and unconcerned about

Ezekiel 16:50

xxxix

Ezekiel 16:57

anything. She did not strengthen the hands of
the poor and needy people. 50 She was arrogant
and committed disgusting actions before me, so I
took them away just as you have seen. 51 Neither
did Samaria commit even half of your sins;
instead, you have done many more disgusting
things than they did, and you have shown that
your sisters were better than you because of all
the disgusting things that you do! 52 Especially
you, show your own shame; in this way you have
shown that your sisters were better than you,
because of the sins you committed in all those
disgusting ways. Your sisters now seem better
than you. Especially you, show your own shame,
for in this way you have shown that your sisters
were better than you.
53 For I will restore their fortunes—the fortunes of Sodom and her daughters, and the
fortunes of Samaria and her daughters; but your
fortunes will be among them. 54 On account
of these things you will show your shame; you
will be humiliated because of everything that
you have done, and in this way you will be a
comfort to them. 55 So your sister Sodom and
her daughters will be restored to their former
condition, and Samaria and her daughters will
be restored to their former estate. Then you and
your daughters will be restored to your former
condition. 56 Sodom your sister was not even
mentioned by your mouth in the days when
you were proud, 57 before your wickedness was
revealed. But now you are an object of scorn to
the daughters of Edom and to all the daughters

Ezekiel 16:58

xl

Ezekiel 17:3

of the Philistines around her. People all about
despise you. † 58 You will show your shame
and your disgusting actions!—this is Yahweh's
declaration! 59 The Lord Yahweh says this: I
will deal with you as you deserve, you who have
despised your oath by breaking the covenant.
60 But I myself will call to mind my covenant
with you made in the days of your youth, and I
will establish an everlasting covenant with you.
61 Then you will call to mind your ways and be
ashamed when you receive your older sisters
and your younger sisters. I will give them to you
as daughters, but not because of your covenant.
62 I myself will establish my covenant with you,
and you will know that I am Yahweh. 63 Because
of these things, you will call everything to mind
and be ashamed, so you will no longer open your
mouth to speak because of your shame, when I
have forgiven you for all that you have done—
this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.'”
1 The

17

word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, present a riddle and speak a
parable to the house of Israel. 3 Say, 'The Lord
Yahweh says this:
A large eagle with large wings and long pinions,
full of feathers,
and that was multicolored went to Lebanon and
took hold of the top of a cedar tree.
† 16:57

Instead of Edom , some ancient copies and modern
versions have Aram , that is, Syria.

Ezekiel 17:4

xli

Ezekiel 17:10

4 It broke off the tips of the branches and took

them to the land of Canaan;
he planted it in a city of merchants.
5 He also took some seed of the land and planted
it in fertile soil.
He placed it beside a large body of water like a
willow.
6 Then it sprouted and became a spreading vine
low to the ground.
Its branches turned toward him, and its roots
grew under it.
So it became a vine and produced branches and
sent out shoots.
7 But there was another great eagle with large
wings and many feathers.
Behold! This vine turned its roots toward the
eagle,
and it spread out its branches toward the eagle
from the place it had been planted so it
would be watered.
8 It had been planted in good soil beside a large
body of water
so it would produce branches and sprout fruit,
to become a magnificent vine.'
9 Say to the people, 'The Lord Yahweh says this:
Will it prosper?
Will it not be uprooted and stripped of its fruit
so that it withers, and all its fresh growth
will wither?
No strong arm or many people will be needed to
pull it out by its roots.
10 So behold! After it has been planted, will it
grow? Will it not wither when the eastern
wind touches it?

Ezekiel 17:11

xlii

Ezekiel 17:19

It will completely wither away in the garden plot
where it sprouted.'”
11 Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 12 “Speak to the rebellious house, 'Do you

not know what these things mean? Behold! The
king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and took her
king and her princes and brought them to him
in Babylon. 13 Then he took a royal descendant,
made a covenant with him, and brought him
under an oath. He took away the powerful
people of the land, 14 so the kingdom might
become lowly and not lift itself up. By keeping
his covenant the land will survive. 15 But the king
of Jerusalem rebelled against him by sending his
ambassadors to Egypt to acquire horses and an
army. Will he succeed? Will the one doing these
things escape? If he breaks the covenant, will he
escape? 16 As I live!—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration—he will surely die in the land of the
king who made him king, the king whose oath
he despised, and whose covenant he broke. He
will die in the middle of Babylon. 17 Pharaoh
with his mighty army and a great company of
men will not help him in battle, when ramps are
constructed and siege walls are built up to cut off
many lives. 18 For the king despised his oath by
breaking the covenant. Behold, he reached out
with his hand to make a promise and yet he did
all these things. He will not escape. 19 Therefore
the Lord Yahweh says this: As I live, was it not
my oath that he despised and my covenant that
he broke? So I will bring his punishment on

Ezekiel 17:20

xliii

Ezekiel 18:4

his head! 20 I will spread my net out over him,
and he will be caught in my hunting net. Then I
will bring him to Babylon and execute judgment
on him there for his treason that he committed
when he betrayed me! 21 All of his refugees in
his armies will fall by the sword, and the ones
who remain will be scattered in every direction.
Then you will know that I am Yahweh; I have
declared this would happen.”
22 The Lord Yahweh says this, 'So I myself will
take away the highest part of the cedar tree, and I
will plant it away from its tender branches. I will
break it off, and I myself will plant it on a high
mountain. 23 I will plant it on the mountains of
Israel so it will bear branches and produce fruit,
and it will become a majestic cedar so that every
winged bird will live under it. They will nest in
the shade of its branches. 24 Then all the trees
of the field will know that I am Yahweh. I bring
down the high trees and I raise up the low trees.
I wither the watered tree and I cause the dried
tree to bloom. I am Yahweh, I have declared that
this will happen; and I have done it.'”
1 The

18

word of Yahweh came to me again,
2
saying, “What do you mean, you who use this
proverb concerning the land of Israel and say,
'Fathers eat sour grapes, and the children's teeth
3 As I live—this is
are made blunt'?
the Lord Yahweh's declaration—there will
certainly no longer be any occasion for
you to use this proverb in Israel. 4 Behold!
Every life belong to me—the life of the

Ezekiel 18:5

xliv

Ezekiel 18:12

father as well as the life of the son, they
belong to me! The soul who sins is the one
who will die!
5 What can be said about a man who is righteous and who carries out justice and righteousness— 6 if he does not eat upon the mountains
or lift up his eyes to the idols of the house of
Israel, and he does not defile his neighbor's wife,
nor approached a woman during her monthly
period, is he a righteous man? 7 What can be said
about a man who does not oppress anyone, and
he gives back to the debtor what was put up as
security for a loan, and he does not commit theft
but gives his food to the hungry and he covers
the naked with clothes, is he a righteous man?
8 What can be said about a man who does not
charge too much interest for the money he loans,
and he does not take too much profit for what he
sells? It is said of him that he carries out justice
and establishes faithfulness between people. 9 If
that man walks in my statutes and keeps my
decrees to act faithfully, then the promise for this
righteous man is this: He will surely live!—this
is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.
10 But suppose that he has a violent son who
sheds blood and does any one of these things
that were mentioned, * 11 (though his father
has not done any of these things). He eats
upon the mountains and he defiles his neighbor's
wife, what can be said about him? 12 This man
oppresses the poor and needy, and he seizes and
* 18:10 Some ancient copies and many modern versions leave
out to a brother .

Ezekiel 18:13

xlv

Ezekiel 18:20

robs, and he does not return a pledge, and he lifts
up his eyes to the idols and commits disgusting
actions, 13 and he lends out money at too high
interest and he makes too much profit on what
he sells, should that man live? Surely he will not!
He will certainly die and his blood will be on him
because he has done all these detestable things.
14 But behold! Suppose there is a man who
bears a son, and his son sees all the sins that
his father has committed, and though he sees
them, he does not do those things. 15 That son
does not eat upon the mountains, and he does
not lift up his eyes to the idols of the house of
Israel, and he does not defile his neighbor's wife,
what can be said about him? 16 That son does not
oppress anyone, or seize a pledge, or take stolen
things, but instead gives his food to the hungry
and covers up the naked with clothes. 17 That son
does not oppress anyone or take interest that is
too high or make too much profit for a loan, but
he carries out my decrees and walks according to
my statutes; that son will not die for his father's
sin: He will surely live! 18 His father, since he
oppressed others by extortion and robbed his
brother, and did what is not good among his
people—behold, he will die in his iniquity.
19 But you say, 'Why does the son not bear
the iniquity of his father?' Because the son
carries out justice and righteousness and keeps
all my statutes; he does them. He will surely
live! 20 The one who sins, he is the one who
will die. A son will not bear his father's iniquity,
and a father will not bear his son's iniquity. The

Ezekiel 18:21

xlvi

Ezekiel 18:28

righteousness of the one who acts rightly will be
on himself, and the wickedness of the wicked will
be on himself.
21 But if the wicked turns away from all his
sins that he has done, and keeps all my statutes
and performs justice and righteousness, then
he will certainly live and not die. 22 All the
transgressions that he has committed will not
be called to mind against him. He will live
by the righteousness that he practices. 23 Do I
greatly rejoice over the death of the wicked—
this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—and not
in his turning away from his way so that he may
live? 24 But if the righteous person turns away
from his righteousness and commits iniquity and
practices abominations like all the abominations
that the wicked person does, then will he live?
All the righteousness that he had done will not
be called to mind when he betrays me in his
treason. So he will die in the sins that he
committed.
25 But you say, 'The way of the Lord is not
fair!' Listen, house of Israel! Are my ways
unfair? Is it not your ways that are unfair?
26 When the righteous man turns away from
his righteousness, and commits iniquity and dies
because of them, then he will die in the iniquity
that he has done. 27 But when a wicked man
turns away from his wickedness that he has done
and performs justice and righteousness, then he
will preserve his life. 28 For he has seen and
turned away from all the transgressions that he
had done. He will surely live, and he will not

Ezekiel 18:29

xlvii

Ezekiel 19:5

die. 29 But the house of Israel says, 'The way of
the Lord is not fair!' How is my way not fair,
house of Israel? It is your ways that are not fair.
30 Therefore I will judge each man among you
according to his ways, house of Israel!—this is
the Lord Yahweh's declaration. Repent and turn
away from all your transgressions so that they
will not be stumbling blocks of iniquity against
you. 31 Throw away from yourselves all of the
transgressions that you have committed; make
for yourselves a new heart and a new spirit. Why
should you die, house of Israel? 32 For I have no
delight in the death of the one who dies—this
is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—so repent and
live!”

19

1 “Now you, take up a lamentation against the
leaders of Israel 2 and say,

'Who was your mother? A lioness, she lived with
a lion's son;
in the midst of young lions, she nurtured her
cubs.
3 She is the one who raised up one of her cubs to
become a young lion, a lion who learned
to tear apart his victims, and then he
devoured men.
4 Then the nations heard about him. He was
caught in their trap, and they brought him
with hooks to the land of Egypt.
5 Then she saw that although she had waited for
his return, her expectation was now gone,
so she took another of her cubs and raised
him to become a young lion.

Ezekiel 19:6

xlviii

Ezekiel 19:12

6 This young lion roamed about in the midst of

lions. He was a young lion and learned to
tear his victims; he devoured men.
7 He seized their widows and ruined their cities.
The land and its fullness were abandoned because of the sound of his roaring. *
8 But the nations came against him from the
surrounding provinces;
they spread their nets over him. He was caught
in their trap.
9 With hooks they put him in a cage and then
they brought him to the king of Babylon.
They brought him to the strongholds so that his
voice would no longer be heard on the
mountains of Israel.
10 Your mother was like a vine planted in your
blood beside the water. †
it was fruitful and full of branches because of the
abundance of water.
11 It had strong branches that were used for
rulers' scepters,
and its size was exalted above the branches,
and its height was seen by the greatness of its
foliage.
12 But the vine was uprooted in fury and thrown
down to the earth, and an eastern wind
dried out its fruit.
Its strong branches were broken off and withered and fire consumed them.
* 19:7 Instead of He seized their widows , some ancient copies

and many modern versions have He destroyed their fortresses .
† 19:10 Instead of in your blood , some ancient copies and
many modern versions have in your vineyard .

Ezekiel 19:13

xlix

Ezekiel 20:7

13 So now it is planted in the wilderness, in a land

of drought and thirst.

14 For fire went out from her large branches and

consumed its fruit.
There is no strong branch on it, no scepter to
rule.' This is a lamentation and will be
sung as a lamentation.”

20

1 It came about in the seventh year,

on the
tenth day of the fifth month, that elders of Israel
came to inquire of Yahweh and sat before me.
2 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
3 “Son of man, declare to the elders of Israel
and say to them, 'The Lord Yahweh says this:
Have you come to inquire of me? As I live, I
will not be inquired of by you!—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration.' 4 Will you judge them?
Will you judge, son of man? Let them know
about their fathers' abominations. 5 Say to them,
'The Lord Yahweh says this: On the day that I
chose Israel and raised my hand to swear an
oath to the descendants of the house of Jacob,
and made myself known to them in the land of
Egypt, when I raised my hand to swear an oath
to them. I said, “I am Yahweh your God”— 6 on
that day I raised my hand to swear an oath to
them that I would bring them out of the land of
Egypt into a land that I had carefully selected for
them. It was flowing with milk and honey; it was
the most beautiful ornament among all the lands.
7 I said to them, “Let each man throw away the
detestable things from before his eyes and the

Ezekiel 20:8

l

Ezekiel 20:15

idols of Egypt. Do not make yourselves unclean;
I am Yahweh your God.” 8 But they rebelled
against me and were unwilling to listen to me.
Each man did not throw away the detestable
things from before his eyes nor forsake the idols
of Egypt, so I determined to pour out my fury
upon them to satisfy my wrath among them in
the middle of the land of Egypt. 9 I acted for
my name's sake so it would not be profaned in
the eyes of the nations among whom they were
staying. I made myself known to them, in their
eyes, by bringing them out of the land of Egypt.
10 So I sent them out of the land of Egypt and
brought them into the wilderness. 11 Then I gave

them my statutes and made my decrees known
to them, by which a man will live if he obeys
them. 12 I also gave them my Sabbaths as a
sign between myself and them, for them to know
that I am Yahweh who makes them holy. 13 But
the house of Israel rebelled against me in the
wilderness. They did not walk in my statutes;
instead, they rejected my decrees, by which a
man will live if he obeys them. They greatly
profaned my Sabbaths, so I said I would pour out
my fury upon them in the wilderness in order to
end them. 14 But I acted for my name's sake so it
would not be profaned in the eyes of the nations,
in whose sight I had brought them out of Egypt.
15 So I myself also raised my hand to swear an
oath to them in the wilderness not to bring them
into the land that I had been going to give them,
a land flowing with milk and honey, which was

Ezekiel 20:16

li

Ezekiel 20:25

the most beautiful ornament among all the lands.
16 I swore this because they had rejected my
decrees and did not walk in my statutes, and they
profaned my Sabbaths, since their hearts walked
after their idols. 17 But my eye spared them from
their destruction and I did not annihilate them in
the wilderness.
18 I said to their children in the wilderness,
“Do not walk in the statutes of your fathers,
or keep their rules, or defile yourselves with
their idols. 19 I am Yahweh your God, walk in
my statutes; keep my decrees and obey them.
20 Keep my Sabbaths holy so that they will be
a sign between me and you, so that you will
know that I am Yahweh your God.” 21 But their
sons and daughters rebelled against me. They
did not walk in my statutes or keep my decrees,
by which a man might live if he obeys them.
They profaned my Sabbaths, so I determined to
pour out my fury upon them to satisfy my wrath
against them in the wilderness. 22 But I turned
my hand away and acted for my name's sake,
so it would not be profaned in the eyes of the
nations in whose sight I had brought out the
Israelites. 23 I myself also lifted up my hand to
swear to them in the wilderness, that I would
scatter them among the nations and disperse
them among the lands. 24 I decided to do this
since they had not obeyed my decrees, and since
they had rejected my statutes and profaned my
Sabbaths. Their eyes were longing after their
fathers' idols. 25 Then I also gave them statutes
that were not good, and decrees by which they

Ezekiel 20:26

lii

Ezekiel 20:33

could not live. 26 I declared them to be unclean
through their gifts—they made a sacrifice of
every firstborn of the womb and caused them to
pass through the fire—that I might fill them with
horror so they will know that I am Yahweh!'
27 Therefore, son of man, speak to the house
of Israel and say to them, 'The Lord Yahweh says
this: In this also your fathers blasphemed me
when they were unfaithful to me. 28 When I
brought them into the land that I had sworn to
give them, and then whenever they saw any high
hill and leafy tree, they offered their sacrifices,
they provoked me by their offerings, and there
they also burned their fragrant incense and
poured out their drink offerings. 29 Then I said
to them, “What is this high place where you
bring offerings there?” So the name is called
Bamah to this day.' 30 Therefore say to the house
of Israel, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: Why do
you make yourselves unclean with the ways of
your fathers? So why do you act like prostitutes,
searching for disgusting things? 31 When you
offer up your gifts—when you cause your sons
to pass through the fire—to this day you defile
yourselves with all your idols. So why should I
let you seek me, house of Israel? As I live—this is
the Lord Yahweh's declaration—I will not allow
you to seek me. 32 The thought that is forming
in your mind will never happen. You say, “Let
us be like the other nations, like the clans in the
other lands who worship wood and stone.”
33 As I live—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—I will certainly reign over you with a

Ezekiel 20:34

liii

Ezekiel 20:41

mighty hand, a raised arm, and fury that will
be poured out on you. 34 I will bring you out
from the other peoples and will gather you out
of the countries among whom you have been
scattered. I will do this with a mighty hand and
with fury poured out. 35 Then I will bring you
into the wilderness of the peoples, and there I
will judge you face to face. 36 As I judged your
fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so
also I will judge you—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration. 37 I will cause you to pass under my
rod, and I will make you obey the requirements
of the covenant. 38 I will purge from among you
the rebels and those who revolt against me. I
will send them out from the land where they are
staying as foreigners, but they will not enter the
land of Israel. Then you will know that I am
Yahweh. 39 So to you, house of Israel, the Lord
Yahweh says this: Each of you should go to his
own idols. Worship them if you will refuse to
listen to me, but you must no longer profane my
holy name with your gifts and your idols.
40 For on my holy mountain, on the mountain

peak of Israel—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—all of the house of Israel will worship me
there in the land. I will be pleased to require
your offerings there, and also the firstfruits of
your tribute with all your holy things. 41 I will
accept you like fragrant incense when I bring
you out from the peoples and gather you out
of the countries where you have been scattered.
I will show myself as holy among you for the

Ezekiel 20:42

liv

Ezekiel 21:3

nations to see. 42 Then, when I bring you to the
land of Israel, to the land that I have lifted up
my hand to swear to give to your fathers, you
will know that I am Yahweh. 43 There you will
call to mind your conduct and all of your deeds
by which you defiled yourselves, and you will
despise yourselves in your own eyes for all your
evil deeds that you have done. 44 So you will
know that I am Yahweh when I do this to you
because of my name's sake, and not because of
your evil deeds, and not because of your corrupt
deeds, house of Israel—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.'”
45 Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 46 “Son of man, set your face toward
the southern lands, and speak against the south;
prophesy against the forest of the Negev. 47 Say
to the forest of the Negev, 'This is Yahweh's
declaration—the Lord Yahweh says this: See, I
will set a fire among you. It will devour every
fresh tree and every dried tree among you. The
fiery flame will not be quenched; every face from
the south to the north will be burned. 48 Then all
flesh will see that I am Yahweh when I light the
fire, and it will not be quenched.'” 49 Then I said,
“Alas! Lord Yahweh, they are saying of me, 'Is
he not a mere teller of parables?'”

21

1 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

2 “Son of man, set your face toward Jerusalem,

and speak against the sanctuaries; prophesy
against the land of Israel. 3 Say to the land of

Ezekiel 21:4

lv

Ezekiel 21:11

Israel, 'Yahweh says this: Behold! I am against
you! I will draw my sword from its sheath and
cut off both the righteous person and the wicked
person from you! 4 In order for me to cut off
both the righteous and the wicked from you, my
sword will go out from its sheath against all flesh
from the south to the north. 5 Then all flesh will
know that I, Yahweh, have drawn my sword from
its sheath. It will no longer hold back!' 6 As for
you, son of man, groan as your loins break! In
bitterness groan before their eyes! 7 Then it will
happen that they will ask you, 'For what reason
are you groaning?' Then you will say, 'Because
of the news that is coming, for every heart will
faint away, and every hand will falter! Every
spirit will grow faint, and every knee will flow
like water. Behold! It is coming and it will be like
this!—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.'”
8 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
9 “Son of man, prophesy and say, 'The Lord says
this:
“Say: A sword! A sword! It will be sharpened
and polished!
10 It will be sharpened in order to engage in great
slaughter! It will be polished in order to be
like lightning!
Should we rejoice in my son's scepter? The
coming sword hates every such rod!
11 So the sword will be given to be polished, and
then to be grasped by the hand!
The sword is sharpened and it is polished and it
is to be given into the hand of the one who
kills!”'”

Ezekiel 21:12

lvi

Ezekiel 21:21

12 Call for help and lament, son of man! For that

sword has come against my people! It is
against all the leaders of Israel.
They are thrown against the sword with my
people. Therefore, slap your thigh!
13 For there is a trial, but what if the scepter
does not last?—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.
14 Now you, son of man, prophesy and hit your
two hands together, for the sword will
attack even a third time!
A sword for the ones to be slaughtered! It is
a sword for the many to be slaughtered,
piercing them everywhere!
15 In order to melt their hearts and to multiply
their fallen, I have set the sword for
slaughter at all their gates. Ah! It is made
like lightning, it is grasped for slaughter.
16 You, sword! Strike to the right! Strike to the
left! Go wherever your face is turned.
17 For I will also hit my two hands together,
and then I will bring my fury to rest! I,
Yahweh, declare it!”
18 The word of Yahweh came to me again,
saying, 19 “Now you, son of man, assign two
roads for the sword of the king of Babylon to
come. The two roads will start in the same
land, and a signpost will mark one of them as
leading to a city. 20 Mark one road for the
Babylonian army to come to Rabbah, the city
of the Ammonites. Mark the other to lead the
army to Judah and the city of Jerusalem, which
is fortified. 21 For the king of Babylon will stop

Ezekiel 21:22

lvii

Ezekiel 21:27

at the crossroads, at the junction, in order to
practice divination. He will shake some arrows
and ask direction from some idols and he will
examine a liver.
22 In his right hand will be an omen about
Jerusalem, to set battering rams against it,
to open his mouth to order the slaughter,
to sound a war cry, to set battering rams against
the gates,
to build a ramp, and to erect siege towers.
23 It will seem to be a useless omen in the eyes
of the ones in Jerusalem, those who had sworn
an oath to the Babylonians! But the king
will accuse them of violating their treaty
in order to besiege them!
24 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this: Because
you have made your guilt to be remembered,
making your transgressions to be revealed, so
that in all your actions your sins will be
seen—
because you have done this you will be taken in
hand.
25 As for you, profane and wicked ruler of
Israel, whose day of punishment has come, and
whose time of committing iniquity has ended,
26 the Lord Yahweh says this to you: Remove the
turban and take off the crown! Things will
no longer be the same! Exalt the lowly and
humble the exalted!
27 A ruin! A ruin! I will make it a ruin! It will
not be restored until the one comes who is
assigned to execute judgment.

Ezekiel 21:28

lviii

Ezekiel 22:4

28 So you, son of man, prophesy and say, 'The

Lord Yahweh says this to the people of Ammon
concerning their coming disgrace: A sword, a
sword is drawn! It is sharpened for the slaughter
in order to devour, so it will be like lightning!
29 While prophets see empty visions for you,
while they perform rituals to come up with lies
for you, this sword will lie on the necks of the
wicked who are about to be killed, whose day of
punishment has come and whose time of iniquity
is about to end. 30 Return the sword to its sheath.
In the place of your creation, in the land of your
origin, I will judge you! 31 I will pour out my
indignation on you! I will fan the fire of my
rage against you and put you into the hand of
cruel men, craftsmen of destruction! 32 You will
become fuel for the fire! Your blood will be in the
midst of the land. You will not be remembered,
for I, Yahweh have declared this!'”

22

1 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

2 “Now you, son of man, will you judge? Will you

judge the city of blood? Make her know all her
abominations. 3 You must say, 'The Lord Yahweh
says this: This is a city that pours out blood
in her midst so that her time may come; a city
that makes idols to make herself unclean. 4 You
have become guilty by the blood that you have
poured out, and you have become unclean by the
idols that you have made. You have drawn your
days to a close, and the end of your years has
come. Therefore I will make you a reproach to

Ezekiel 22:5

lix

Ezekiel 22:14

the nations and a laughingstock to all the lands.
5 Both those who are near and those who are
far away from you will mock you—you unclean
city—with the reputation known everywhere as
being full of confusion.
6 Behold! The rulers of Israel, each one by
his own power, have come to you to pour out
blood. 7 They have dishonored fathers and
mothers within you, and they have performed
oppression on the foreigners in your midst. They
have mistreated the orphans and the widows
within you. 8 You have despised my holy things
and have profaned my Sabbaths. 9 Slanderous
men have come within you in order to pour out
blood, and they eat on the mountains. They
perform wickedness in your midst. 10 Within
you men uncover the nakedness of their father. Within you they have violated unclean
women during their menstrual period. 11 Men
who commit abominations with their neighbors'
wives, and men who make their own daughtersin-law shamefully unclean; men who abuse their
own sisters—daughters of their own fathers—all
these are done within you. 12 These men take
bribes within you in order to pour out blood and
you have taken interest and gained too much
profit, and you have damaged your neighbors
through oppression, and you have forgotten
me—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.
13 See!
With my hand I have struck the
dishonest gain that you have made, and the
bloodshed that is done in the midst of you. 14 Will
your heart stand, will your hands be strong on

Ezekiel 22:15

lx

Ezekiel 22:25

the days when I myself will deal with you? I,
Yahweh, am declaring this, and I will do it.
15 So I will scatter you among the nations and
disperse you through the lands. In this way, I
will purge your uncleanness from you. 16 So you
will become unclean in the eyes of the nations.
Then you will know that I am Yahweh.'” *
17 Next the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, the house of Israel has become
dross to me. All of them are the leftovers of
bronze and tin, and iron and lead in the midst
of you. They will be like the dross of silver in
your furnace. 19 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says
this, 'Because all of you have become like dross,
therefore, behold! I am about to gather you into
the midst of Jerusalem. 20 As men gather silver,
bronze, iron, lead and tin and put it inside a
furnace to melt it, and they blow the fire on it in
order to melt it, so I will gather you in my anger
and my wrath, and I will put you there and melt
you. 21 I will gather you and blow on you the
fire of my wrath, and you will be melted in the
midst of it. 22 As silver is melted in a furnace,
you will be melted in it, and you will know that
I, Yahweh, have poured out my wrath on you!'”
23 The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
24 “Son of man, say to her, 'You are a land that
has not been cleansed. There is no rain on
the day of wrath! 25 There is a conspiracy of
her prophets in her midst, like a roaring lion
* 22:16

Instead of you will become unclean , some ancient
copies have I will give you your inheritance .

Ezekiel 22:26

lxi

Ezekiel 23:3

tearing apart a victim. They consume life and
take precious wealth; they make many widows
within her! † 26 Her priests do violence to my
law, and they profane my holy things. They do
not distinguish between holy things and profane
things, and do not teach the difference between
the unclean and the clean. They hide their
eyes from my Sabbaths so that I am profaned
in their midst. 27 Her princes within her are
like wolves tearing apart their victims. They
pour out blood and destroy life, to make a profit
dishonestly. 28 Her prophets have painted them
over with whitewash; they see false visions and
predict falsehoods to them. They say “The Lord
Yahweh says this” when Yahweh has not spoken.
29 The people of the land have oppressed through
extortion and plundered through robbery, and
they mistreat the poor and needy, and oppress
the foreigner without justice. 30 So I searched for
a man from them who would build up a wall and
who would stand before me in its breach for the
land so I would not destroy it, but I found no one.
31 So I will pour out my indignation upon them.
I will finish them with the fire of my indignation
and set their way on their own heads—this is the
Lord Yahweh's declaration.'”
1 The

23

word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, there were two women, daughters
of the same mother. 3 They acted as prostitutes
† 22:25 Instead of There is a conspiracy of her prophets within
her , some ancient copies have whose princes .

Ezekiel 23:4

lxii

Ezekiel 23:12

in Egypt in the time of their youth.
They
acted as prostitutes there. Their breasts were
squeezed and their virgin nipples were fondled
there. 4 Their names were Oholah—the older
sister—and Oholibah—her younger sister. Then
they became mine and bore sons and daughters.
Their names mean this: Oholah means Samaria,
and Oholibah means Jerusalem.
5 But Oholah acted as a prostitute even when
she was mine; she lusted for her lovers, for the
Assyrians who were dominant, 6 the governor
who wore blue, and for his officials, who were
strong and handsome, all of them men riding on
horses. 7 So she gave herself as a prostitute to
them, to all the best of Assyria's men, and she
made herself unclean with everyone she lusted
for—and with all their idols. 8 For she had
not left her prostitute behavior behind in Egypt,
when they had slept with her when she had been
a young girl, when they first began to fondle her
virgin breasts, when they first began to pour out
their promiscuous behavior on her. 9 Therefore
I gave her into the hand of her lovers, into
the hand of the Assyrians for whom she lusted.
10 They uncovered her nakedness, took her sons
and daughters, killed her with the sword, and
she became notorious among other women, so
they executed judgment on her.
11 Her sister Oholibah saw this, but she lusted
even more passionately and acted like a prostitute even more than her sister. 12 She lusted for
the Assyrians, the governors and the dominating
officials who dressed impressively, who were

Ezekiel 23:13

lxiii

Ezekiel 23:21

men riding horses. All of them were strong,
handsome men. 13 I saw that she had made
herself unclean.
It was the same for both
sisters. 14 Then she increased her prostitution
even more. She saw men carved on walls, figures
of Chaldeans painted in red, 15 wearing belts
around their waists, with flowing turbans on
their heads. All of them had the appearance of
officers of chariot troops, the likeness of sons of
Babylonia, whose native land is Chaldea. 16 As
soon as her eyes saw them, she lusted for them,
so she sent out messengers to them in Chaldea.
17 Then the Babylonians came to her and to her
bed of lust, and they made her unclean with their
promiscuousness. By what she had done she was
made unclean, so she turned herself away from
them in disgust.
18 When she displayed her acts of prostitution
and uncovered her nakedness,
I turned away from her, just as I had turned away
in disgust from her sister.
19 Then she increased her prostitution as she
remembered the days of her youth,
when she was a prostitute in the land of Egypt.
20 So she lusted for her lovers,
whose private parts were like those of donkeys,
and whose reproductive emissions were
like those of horses.
21 This is how you committed shameful acts of
your youth, when the Egyptians fondled
your nipples and squeezed your young
breasts.

Ezekiel 23:22

22 Therefore,

lxiv

Ezekiel 23:28

Oholibah, the Lord Yahweh says
this, 'Behold! I will turn your lovers
against you.
Those from whom you turned away, I will bring
them against you from every side:
23 the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans, Pekod,
Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians with
them,
strong, handsome men, governors and commanders, all of them are officers and men of
reputation, all of them riding on horses.
24 They will come against you with weapons,
and with chariots and wagons, and with
a great crowd of people.
They will set large shields, small shields, and
helmets against you all around.
I will give them the opportunity to punish
you, and they will punish you with their
actions.
25 For I will set my jealous anger on you, and
they will deal with you in fury. They will
cut off your noses and your ears, and your
survivors will fall by the sword. They will
take away your sons and your daughters,
and your survivors will be devoured by
fire. 26 They will strip you of your clothes
and take away all of your jewelry. 27 So I
will remove your shameful behavior from
you and your acts of prostitution from the
land of Egypt. You will not lift up your
eyes toward them with longing, and you
will think of Egypt no longer.' 28 For the
Lord Yahweh says this, 'Behold! I will

Ezekiel 23:29

lxv

Ezekiel 23:35

give you into the hand of the ones you
hate, back into the hand of the ones from
whom you had turned away. 29 They will
deal with you hatefully; they will take all
your possessions and abandon you naked
and bare, and your nakedness will be
uncovered just as when you engaged in
promiscuity and prostitutions. 30 These
things will be done to you in your acting
like a prostitute, lusting after nations by
which you became unclean with their
idols. 31 You have walked in the way
of your sister, so I will put her cup of
punishment into your hand.'
32 The Lord Yahweh says this, 'You will drink
your sister's cup that is deep and large.
You will become a laughingstock and a subject
for derision—this cup contains a great
amount.
33 You will be filled with drunkenness and
sorrow,
the cup of horror and devastation;
the cup of your sister Samaria.
34 You will drink it and drain it empty; then you
will shatter it and tear your breasts with
the pieces.
For I have declared it—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.' 35 Therefore, the Lord Yahweh says this, 'Because you have forgotten
me and thrown me away behind your
back, so also you will bear the consequences of your shameful behavior and
acts of sexual immorality.'”

Ezekiel 23:36

lxvi

Ezekiel 23:45

36 Yahweh said to me, “Son of man, will you

judge Oholah and Oholibah? So present to
them their disgusting actions, 37 since they have
committed adultery, and since there is blood on
their hands. They have committed adultery with
their idols, and they have even caused their sons
to pass through the fire, as food for their idols.
38 Then they continue to do this to me: They
make my sanctuary unclean, and on the same
day they defile my Sabbaths. 39 For when they
had slaughtered their children for their idols,
then they came to my sanctuary on the same
day to defile it! So behold! This is what they
have done in the middle of my house. 40 You
sent out for men who came from far away, to
whom messengers had been sent—now behold.
They indeed came, those for whom you bathed,
painted your eyes, and adorned yourself with
jewelry. 41 There you sat on a beautiful bed and
at a table arranged before it where you placed
my incense and my oil. 42 So the sound of a
noisy crowd was around her; including all kinds
of men, even Sabeans were brought in from the
wilderness, and they put bracelets on their hands
and beautiful crowns on their heads.
43 Then I said of her who was worn out by
adultery, 'Now they will be sexually immoral
with her, and she with them.' 44 They went in
to her and slept with her as men go in to be with
a prostitute. In this way they slept with Oholah
and Oholibah, who were immoral women. 45 But
righteous men will pass judgment and punish
them as adulteresses, and they will punish them

Ezekiel 23:46

lxvii

Ezekiel 24:5

with the sentence for those who shed blood,
because they are adulteresses and blood is on
their hands. 46 So the Lord Yahweh says this: I
will raise up a company against them and give
them up to be terrorized and plundered. 47 Then
that company will stone them with stones and
cut them down with their swords. They will kill
their sons and daughters and burn down their
houses. 48 For I will remove shameful behavior
from the land and discipline all the women so
they will no longer act like prostitutes. 49 So they
will set your shameful behavior against you. You
will bear the guilt of your sins with your idols,
and in this way you will know that I am the Lord
Yahweh.”

24

1 The word of Yahweh came to me in the ninth

year, in the tenth month, and on the tenth day
of the month, saying, 2 “Son of man, write for
yourself the name of this day, this exact day, for
this exact day the king of Babylon has besieged
Jerusalem. 3 So speak a proverb against this
rebellious house, a parable. Say to them, 'The
Lord Yahweh says this:
Place the cooking pot. Place it and pour water
into it.
4 Gather pieces of food within it, every good
piece—the thigh and shoulder—
and fill it with the best bones.
5 Take the best of the flock and pile up the bones
under it.
Bring it to a boil and cook the bones in it.

Ezekiel 24:6

lxviii

Ezekiel 24:17

6 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this:

Woe
to the city of blood, a cooking pot that has rust
in it and that rust will not come out of it. Take
piece after piece from it, but do not cast lots
for it. 7 For her blood is in the midst of her.
She has set it on the smooth rock; she has not
poured it out on the ground to cover it with
dust, 8 so it brings fury up to exact vengeance.
I placed her blood on the smooth rock so it
could not be covered. 9 Therefore, the Lord
Yahweh says this: Woe to the city of blood. I
will also enlarge the pile of wood. 10 Stack up
the wood and kindle the fire. Cook the meat
well and mix in the spices and let the bones
be charred. 11 Then set the pot on its coals
empty, in order to heat and scorch its bronze,
so its uncleanness within it will be melted, its
corrosion consumed.' 12 She has become weary
because of toil, but her corrosion has not gone
out of her by the fire. 13 Your shameful behavior
is in your uncleanness.
Because I tried to
cleanse you but still you would not be cleansed
from your uncleanness, you will not be cleansed
anymore until I have satisfied my fury upon you.
14 I, Yahweh, have declared it, and I will do it.
I will not relent nor will I rest from it. As your
ways were, and as your activities, they will judge
you!—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.”
15 Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 16 “Son of man! Behold, I am taking the

desire of your eyes from you with a plague, but
you must not mourn nor weep, and your tears
must not flow. 17 You must groan silently. Do not

Ezekiel 24:18

lxix

Ezekiel 24:27

conduct a funeral for the dead. Tie your turban
on you and place your sandals on your feet, but
do not veil your facial hair or eat the bread of
men who mourn for having lost their wives.”
18 So I spoke to the people in the morning, and
my wife died in the evening. In the morning I
did what I had been commanded to do.
19 The people asked me, “Will you not tell
us what these things mean, the things that you
are doing?” 20 So I said to them, “The word of
Yahweh came to me, saying, 21 'Say to the house
of Israel, the Lord Yahweh says this: Behold! I
will desecrate my sanctuary—the pride of your
power, the delight of your eyes, and the yearning
of your soul, and your sons and your daughters
whom you left behind will fall by the sword.
22 Then you will do exactly as I have done: you
will not veil your facial hair, nor eat the bread
of mourning men! 23 Instead, your turbans will
be on your heads, and your sandals on your feet;
you will not mourn nor weep, for you will melt
away in your iniquities, and each man will groan
for his brother. 24 So Ezekiel will be a sign for
you, as everything that he has done you will do
when this comes. Then you will know that I am
the Lord Yahweh!'”
25 “But you, son of man, on the day that I
capture their temple, which is their joy, their
pride, and what they see and desire—and when
I take away their sons and daughters— 26 on that
day, a refugee will come to you to give you the
news! 27 On that day your mouth will be opened
up to that refugee and you will speak—you will

Ezekiel 25:1

lxx

Ezekiel 25:9

no longer be silent. You will be a sign for them
so that they will know that I am Yahweh.”

25

1 Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 2 “Son of man, set your face against the

people of Ammon and prophesy against them.
3 Say to the people of Ammon, 'Hear the word
of the Lord Yahweh. This is what the Lord
Yahweh says: Because you said, “Aha!” over
my sanctuary when it was profaned, and against
the land of Israel when it was desolate, and
against the house of Judah when they went into
exile, 4 therefore, behold, I am giving you to a
people in the east as their possession. They will
set up camp against you and set up their tents
among you. They will eat your fruit and they
will drink your milk. 5 I will make Rabbah a
pasture for camels and the people of Ammon a
field for flocks. Then you will know that I am
Yahweh. 6 For the Lord Yahweh says this: You
have clapped your hands and stamped your feet,
and rejoiced with all the contempt within you
against the land of Israel. 7 Therefore, behold!
I will strike you with my hand and give you as
plunder to the nations. I will cut you off from
the peoples and make you perish from among
the countries! I will destroy you, and you will
know that I am Yahweh.'
8 The Lord Yahweh says this, 'Because Moab
and Seir say, “Behold! The house of Judah is
like every other nation.” 9 Therefore, behold!
I will open the slopes of Moab, starting at

Ezekiel 25:10

lxxi

Ezekiel 25:17

his cities on the border—the splendor of Beth
Jeshimoth, Baal Meon, and Kiriathaim— 10 to
the people of the east who have been against
the people of Ammon. I will give them up as a
possession so that the people of Ammon will not
be remembered among the nations. 11 So I will
perform judgments against Moab, and they will
know that I am Yahweh.'
12 The Lord Yahweh says this, 'Edom has taken

vengeance against the house of Judah and has
committed wrong in doing so. 13 Therefore, the
Lord Yahweh says this: I will strike Edom with
my hand and destroy every person and animal
there. I will make them a ruined, abandoned
place, from Teman to Dedan. They will fall by the
sword. 14 I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by
the hand of my people Israel, and they will do to
Edom according to my anger and my fury, and
they will know my vengeance—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration.'
15 The Lord Yahweh says this, 'The Philistines

have taken vengeance with malice and from
within themselves they tried to destroy Judah
again and again. 16 So this is what the Lord
Yahweh says: Behold! I will reach out with
my hand against the Philistines, and I will cut
off the Kerethites and destroy the remnant who
are along the seacoast. 17 For I will take great
vengeance against them with furious acts of
punishment, so they will know that I am Yahweh,
when I take my vengeance on them.'”

Ezekiel 26:1

lxxii

Ezekiel 26:10

26

1 So it was in the eleventh year, on the first day

of the month, that the word of Yahweh came to
me, saying, 2 “Son of man, because Tyre has said
against Jerusalem, 'Aha! The gates of the people
are broken! She has turned to me; I will be filled
up because she is ruined.' 3 Therefore the Lord
Yahweh says this, 'Behold! I am against you,
Tyre, and I will raise up many nations against
you like the sea raises its waves. 4 They will
destroy the walls of Tyre and tear down her
towers. I will sweep her dust away and make
her like a bare rock. 5 She will become a place
for nets to dry out in the midst of the sea, since
I have declared it—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration—and she will become plunder for
the nations. 6 Her daughters who are in the fields
will be slaughtered by the swords, and they will
know that I am Yahweh.'
7 For this is what Yahweh says: Behold, from
the north I am bringing Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon, king of kings, against Tyre, with
horses and chariots, and with horsemen and a
great many people. 8 He will kill your daughters
in the field. He will set up a siege work and
build a ramp against your walls and raise up
shields against you. 9 He will place his battering
rams to hit against your walls, and his tools will
tear down your towers. 10 His horses will be so
many that their dust will cover you. Your walls
will shake with the sound of horsemen, wagons,
and chariots. When he enters your gates, he
will enter as men come into a city whose walls

Ezekiel 26:11

lxxiii

Ezekiel 26:18

have been broken down. 11 The hooves of his
horses will trample all of your streets. He will
kill your people with the sword and your mighty
stone pillars will fall to the ground. 12 They will
plunder your riches and loot your merchandise.
They will tear down your walls and destroy your
luxurious homes. Your stones, your timber, and
the rubble they will throw into the waters. 13 I
will stop the noise of your songs. The sound of
your harps will be heard no more. 14 I will make
you a bare rock, you will become a place where
nets are spread out to dry. You will never be built
again, for I, Lord Yahweh have spoken—this is
the Lord Yahweh's declaration.
15 The Lord Yahweh says this to Tyre, 'Will
not the islands quake with the sound of your
downfall, and with the groans of the wounded
when the terrible slaughter is in your midst?
16 Then all the princes of the sea will step down
from their thrones and remove their robes and
cast off their embroidered garments. They will
clothe themselves with trembling, they will sit on
the ground and tremble every moment, and they
will be appalled because of you. 17 They will lift
up a lament for you and say to you,
How you, who were inhabited by sailors, have
been destroyed. The famous city that was
so strong—it is now gone from the sea.
The ones living in her once spread a terror about
themselves upon everyone who lived near
them.
18 Now the coasts tremble on the day of your
downfall.

Ezekiel 26:19

lxxiv

Ezekiel 27:5

The islands in the sea are terrified, because you
are no longer in your place.'
19 For the Lord Yahweh says this: When I
make you a desolate city, like the other cities
that are not inhabited, when I raise up the deeps
against you, and when the great waters cover
you, 20 then I will bring you down to the people
of ancient times, like the others who have gone
down into the pit; for I will make you live in
the lowest realms of the earth as in ruins of
ancient times. Because of this you will not come
back and stand in the land of the living. * 21 I
will place disaster on you, and you will be no
more forever. Then you will be sought, but you
will never be found ever again—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration.”

27

1 Again the word of Yahweh came to me, saying, 2 “Now you, son of man, begin a lamentation
concerning Tyre, 3 and say to Tyre, who lives

within the gates of the sea, merchants of peoples
to many islands, the Lord Yahweh says this to
you:
Tyre, you have said, 'I am perfect in beauty.'
4 Your borders are in the heart of the seas; your
builders have perfected your beauty.
5 They have made all your planks with cypress
from Mount Hermon;
* 26:20 The expression and stand in the land of the living is

supplied by an ancient version. The Hebrew has I will place glory
in the land of the living , which does not seem to fit the context
here.

Ezekiel 27:6

lxxv

Ezekiel 27:13

they took cedar from Lebanon to make a mast
for you.
6 They made your oars from the oaks of Bashan;
they made your decks out of cypress wood from
Cyprus, and they overlaid them with ivory.
7 Your sails were made from colorful linen from
Egypt that served as your banner;
the colors of blue and purple from the coasts of
Elishah are used for the awning on your
boat.
8 Those who were living in Sidon and Arvad were
your rowers;
the sages of Tyre were within you; they were
your pilots.
9 Highly experienced craftsmen from Byblos
filled your seams;
all the ships of the sea and their sailors among
you were carrying your merchandise for
trade.
10 Persia, Lydia, and Libya were in your army,
your men of war.
they hung shield and helmet within you; they
showed your splendor.
11 The men of Arvad and Helek in your army
were on your walls surrounding you, and
the people of Gammad were in your towers. They hung up their shields on your
walls all around you! They completed
your beauty.
12 Tarshish was a trading partner with you
because of your abundant wealth of goods to sell:
Silver, iron, tin, and lead. They bought and sold
your wares! 13 Javan, Tubal, and Meshech—they

Ezekiel 27:14

lxxvi

Ezekiel 27:25

traded slaves and in items made of bronze. They
handled your merchandise. 14 Beth Togarmah
provided horses, stallions, and mules as your
merchandise. 15 The men of Rhodes were your
traders on many coasts. Merchandise was in
your hand; they sent back horn, ivory, and ebony
as tribute! 16 Aram was a dealer in your many
products; they provided emeralds, purple, colored cloth, fine fabric, pearls, and rubies as your
merchandise. 17 Judah and the land of Israel
were trading with you. They provided wheat
from Minnith, cakes, honey, oil, and balsam as
your merchandise. 18 Damascus was a trader of
all your products, of all your enormous wealth,
and of the wine of Helbon and the wool of Zahar.
19 Dan and Javan from Izal provided you with
merchandise of wrought iron, cinnamon, and
calamus. This became merchandise for you.
20 Dedan was your dealer in fine saddle blankets.
21 Arabia and all the chiefs of Kedar were traders
with you; they provided you with lambs, rams
and goats. 22 The traders of Sheba and Raamah
came to sell you the best of every spice and in
all kinds of precious gems; they traded gold for
your merchandise. 23 Haran, Kanneh, and Eden
were traders with you, along with Sheba, Ashur,
and Kilmad. 24 These were your dealers in ornate
robes of violet cloths with woven colors, and
in blankets of multicolored, embroidered, and
well-woven cloth in your marketplaces. 25 The
ships of Tarshish were the transporters of your
merchandise!
So you were filled up, heavily laden with cargo

Ezekiel 27:26

lxxvii

Ezekiel 27:34

in the heart of the seas!

26 Your rowers have brought you into vast seas;

the eastern wind has broken you in the middle
of them.
27 Your wealth, merchandise, and trade goods;
your sailors and pilots, and ship builders;
your traders of merchandise and all the
men of war who are in you, and all your
crew—they will sink into the depths of the
sea on the day of your destruction.
28 Cities at the sea will tremble at the sound of
your pilots' cry;
29 All those who handle oars will come down
from their ships;
mariners and all the pilots on the sea will stand
on the land.
30 Then they will make you listen to their voice
and will wail bitterly;
they will cast dust up on their heads. They will
roll about in ashes.
31 They will shave their heads bald for you and
bind themselves with sackcloth,
and they will weep bitterly over you and they
will cry out.
32 They will lift up their wails of lamentation for
you and sing dirges over you,
Who is like Tyre, who has now been brought to
silence in the middle of the sea?
33 When your merchandise went ashore from the
sea, it satisfied many peoples;
you enriched the kings of the earth with your
great wealth and merchandise!
34 But when you were shattered by the seas, by
deep waters,

Ezekiel 27:35

lxxviii

Ezekiel 28:9

your merchandise and all your crew sank!
35 All the inhabitants of the coasts were appalled
at you,
and their kings shuddered in horror! Their faces
trembled!
36 The merchants of the people hiss at you;
you have become a horror, and you will be no
more forever.”

28

1 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

2 “Son of man, say to the ruler of Tyre, 'The Lord

Yahweh says this: Your heart is arrogant! You
have said, “I am a god! I will sit in the seat of
the gods in the heart of the seas!” Even though
you are a man and not a god, you make your
heart like the heart of a god; 3 you think that you
are wiser than Daniel, and that no secret amazes
you! 4 You have made yourself wealthy with
wisdom and skill, and obtained gold and silver
in your treasuries! 5 By great wisdom and by
your trading, you have multiplied your wealth,
so your heart is arrogant because of your wealth.
6 Therefore, the Lord Yahweh says this: Because
you have made your heart like the heart of a
god, 7 I will therefore bring foreigners against
you, terrifying men from other nations. They
will bring their swords against the beauty of your
wisdom, and they will profane your splendor.
8 They will send you down to the pit, and you
will die the death of those who die in the heart
of the seas. 9 Will you truly say, “I am a god”
to the face of one who kills you? You are a man

Ezekiel 28:10

lxxix

Ezekiel 28:18

and not God, and you will be in the hand of the
one who pierces you. 10 You will die the death
of the uncircumcised by the hand of foreigners,
for I have declared it—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.'”
11 The word of Yahweh came again to me,
saying, 12 “Son of man, lift up a lament for the
king of Tyre and say to him, 'The Lord Yahweh
says this: You were the model of perfection, full
of wisdom and perfect in beauty. 13 You were in
Eden, the garden of God. Every precious stone
covered you: ruby, topaz, emerald, chrysolite,
onyx, jasper, sapphire, turquoise, and beryl.
Your settings and mountings were made from
gold. It was on the day you were created that
they were prepared. 14 I placed you on the holy
mountain of God as the cherub I anointed to
guard mankind. You were in the midst of the
fiery stones where you walked about. 15 You had
integrity in your ways from the day you were
created until injustice was found within you.
16 Through your great trade you were filled with
violence, and so you sinned. So I threw you out
of the mountain of God, as a one who was defiled,
and I destroyed you, guardian cherub, and drove
you from among the fiery stones. 17 Your heart
was arrogant with your beauty; you ruined your
wisdom because of your splendor. I have sent
you down to the earth. I have placed you before
kings so they may see you. 18 Because of your
many sins and your dishonest trade, you have
defiled your holy places. So I have made fire
come out from you; it will consume you. I will

Ezekiel 28:19

lxxx

Ezekiel 28:26

turn you into ashes on the earth in the sight of all
who look at you. 19 All the ones who knew you
among the peoples will shudder at you; they will
be horrified, and you will be no more forever.'”
20 Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 21 “Son of man, set your face against
Sidon and prophesy against her. 22 Say, 'The Lord

Yahweh says this: Behold! I am against you,
Sidon! For I will be glorified in your midst so
your people will know that I am Yahweh when
I execute justice within you. I will be shown to
be holy in you. 23 I will send out a plague in you
and blood in your streets, and the slain will fall
in your midst. When the sword comes against
you from all around, then you will know that
I am Yahweh. 24 Then there will no longer be
pricking briars and painful thorns for the house
of Israel from all those around her who despise
her people, so they will know that I am the Lord
Yahweh!'
25 The Lord Yahweh says this, 'When I gather

the house of Israel from the peoples among
whom they were scattered, and when I am set
apart among them, so the nations may see, then
they will make their homes in the land I will
give to my servant Jacob. 26 Then they will
live securely within her and build houses, plant
vineyards, and live securely when I execute
justice on all the ones who now despise them
from all around; so they will know that I am
Yahweh their God!'”

Ezekiel 29:1

lxxxi

Ezekiel 29:9

29

1 In the tenth year, in the tenth month on the

twelfth day of the month, the word of Yahweh
came to me, saying, 2 “Son of man, set your face
against Pharaoh, the king of Egypt; prophesy
against him and against all of Egypt. 3 Declare
and say, 'The Lord Yahweh says this:
Behold! I am against you, Pharaoh, king of Egypt.
You, the great sea monster that lurks in the midst
of the river,
that says, “My river is my own. I have made it
for myself.” 4 For I will place hooks in your
jaw, and the fish of your Nile will cling
to your scales; I will lift you up from the
middle of your river along with all the fish
of the river that cling to your scales.
5 I will throw you down into the wilderness, you
and all the fish from your river.
You will fall on the open field; you will not be
gathered nor lifted up.
I will give you as food to the living things of the
earth and to the birds of the heavens.
6 Then all the inhabitants of Egypt will know that
I am Yahweh,
because they have been a reed stalk to the house
of Israel.
7 When they took hold of you in their hand, you
broke and tore open their shoulder;
and when they leaned on you, you were broken,
and you caused their legs to be unsteady.
8 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this: Behold!
I will bring a sword against you. I will cut off
both man and beast from you. 9 So the land of

Ezekiel 29:10

lxxxii

Ezekiel 29:17

Egypt will become desolate and a ruin. Then
they will know that I am Yahweh, because the
sea monster had said, “The river is mine, for I
have made it.” 10 Therefore, behold! I am against
you and against your river, so I will give the
land of Egypt over to desolation and waste, and
you will become a wasteland from the Migdol
to Syene and the borders of Cush. 11 No man's
foot will pass through it, and no wild animal's
foot will pass through it. It will not be inhabited
for forty years. 12 For I will make the land of
Egypt a desolation in the midst of uninhabited
lands, and its cities in the midst of wasted cities
will become a desolation for forty years; then I
will scatter Egypt among the nations, and I will
disperse them though the lands.
13 For the Lord Yahweh says this: At the end of
forty years I will gather Egypt from the peoples
among whom they were scattered. 14 I will
restore the fortunes of Egypt and bring them
back to the region of Pathros, to the land of their
origin. Then they will be a lowly kingdom there.
15 It will be the lowliest of the kingdoms, and it
will not be lifted up any more among the nations.
I will diminish them so they will no longer rule
over nations. 16 The Egyptians will no longer be
a reason for confidence for the house of Israel.
Instead, they will be a reminder of the iniquity
that Israel committed when they turned to Egypt
for help. Then they will know that I am the Lord
Yahweh.'”
17 Then it came about in the twenty-seventh
year on the first of the first month, that the

Ezekiel 29:18

lxxxiii

Ezekiel 30:4

word of Yahweh came to me, saying, 18 “Son
of man, Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon
stationed his army to do hard work against Tyre.
Every head was rubbed until it was made bald,
and every shoulder was made raw. Yet he and
his army received no payment from Tyre for
the hard work that he carried out against it.
19 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this, 'Behold!
I am giving the land of Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar
the king of Babylon, and he will take away its
wealth, plunder its possessions, and carry off all
he finds there; that will be his army's wages. 20 I
have given him the land of Egypt as the wages
for the work they did for me—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration. 21 On that day I will make
a horn sprout up for the house of Israel, and I
make you speak in their midst, so that they will
know that I am Yahweh.'”
1 The

30

word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
of man, prophesy and say, 'The Lord
Yahweh says this:
Wail, “Woe is the coming day.”
3 The day is near. The day is near for Yahweh. It
will be a day of clouds, a time of doom for
nations.
4 Then a sword will come against Egypt, and
there will be anguish in Cush when the
killed people fall in Egypt—
when they take her wealth, and when her
foundations are ruined.
2 “Son

Ezekiel 30:5

5 Cush

lxxxiv

Ezekiel 30:13

and Put, Lydia and all Arabia, and
Libya, together with the people belonging to the
covenant—they will all fall by the sword.
6 Yahweh says this:
So the ones who support Egypt will fall, and the
pride of her strength will go down.
From Migdol to Syene their soldiers will fall
by the sword—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.
7 They will be appalled in the midst of the
abandoned lands, and their cities will be among
all the ruined cities. 8 Then they will know that I
am Yahweh, when I set fire in Egypt, and when
all of her helpers are destroyed. 9 In that day
messengers will go out from before me in ships
to terrorize a secure Cush, and there will be
anguish among them on the day of Egypt's doom.
For behold! It is coming.
10 The Lord Yahweh says this: I will make an
end of the multitudes of Egypt by the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon. 11 He and
his army with him, the terror of nations, will
be brought to destroy the land; they will draw
out their swords against Egypt and fill the land
with those who have been killed. 12 I will make
the rivers into dry ground, and I will sell the
land into the hand of wicked men. I will make
the land and its fullness desolate by the hand of
strangers—I, Yahweh, have spoken.
13 The Lord Yahweh says this: I will destroy
idols, and I will bring an end to the worthless
idols of Memphis. There will no longer be a
prince in the land of Egypt, and I will put terror

Ezekiel 30:14

lxxxv

Ezekiel 30:24

on the land of Egypt. 14 Then I will make Pathros
desolate and set fire in Zoan, and I will execute
acts of judgment on Thebes. 15 For I will pour out
my fury on Pelusium, the stronghold of Egypt,
and cut off the multitude of Thebes. 16 Then I
will set fire in Egypt; Pelusium will be in great
agony, Thebes will be broken up, and Memphis
will face enemies every day. 17 The young men
in Heliopolis and Bubastis will fall by the sword,
and their cities will go into captivity. 18 In
Tahpanhes, the day will hold back its light when
I break the yoke of Egypt there, and the pride
of her strength will be finished. There will be a
cloud covering her, and her daughters will walk
into captivity. 19 I will execute acts of judgment
in Egypt, so they will know that I am Yahweh.'”
20 Then it came about in the eleventh year,
in the first month, in the seventh day of the
month, that the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 21 “Son of man, I have broken the arm
of Pharaoh, the king of Egypt. Behold! It has not
been bound up, or set to heal with a bandage,
so that it will become strong enough to grasp a
sword. 22 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this,
'Behold, I am against Pharaoh, the king of Egypt.
For I will break his arm, both the strong one
and the broken one, and I will make the sword
fall from his hand. 23 Then I will scatter Egypt
among the nations and disperse them among the
lands. 24 I will strengthen the arms of the king of
Babylon and place my sword in his hand so that
I might destroy Pharaoh's arms. He will groan
before the king of Babylon with the groans of a

Ezekiel 30:25

lxxxvi

Ezekiel 31:6

dying man. 25 For I will strengthen the arms of
the king of Babylon, while Pharaoh's arms will
fall. Then they will know that I am Yahweh,
when I put my sword into the hand of the king of
Babylon; for he will attack the land of Egypt with
it. 26 So I will scatter Egypt among the nations
and disperse them through the lands. Then they
will know that I am Yahweh.'”

31

1 Then it came about in the eleventh year, in

the third month, on the first day of the month,
that the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, say to Pharaoh, the king of Egypt,
and to his multitudes around him,
'In your greatness, who are you like?
3 Behold! Assyria was a cedar in Lebanon with
beautiful branches, giving shade to the
forest,
and the tallest in height, and the branches
formed its treetop.
4 Many waters made it tall; the deep waters made
it huge. Rivers flowed all around its area,
for their channels stretched out to all the trees
in the field.
5 Its great height was more than any of the other
trees in the field, and its branches became
very many;
its branches grew long because of many waters
as they grew.
6 Every bird of the heavens nested in its
branches, while every living thing of the

Ezekiel 31:7

lxxxvii

Ezekiel 31:13

field gave birth to its young under its
foliage.
All of the many nations lived under its shade.
7 For it was beautiful in its greatness and the
length of its branches, for its roots were
in many waters.
8 Cedars in the garden of God could not equal it.
None among the cypress trees matched its
branches, and the plane tree could not
equal its boughs.
There was no other tree in the garden of God that
was like it in its beauty.
9 I made it beautiful with its many branches
and all the trees of Eden that were in the garden
of God envied it.
10 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this: Because it was tall in height, and it set its treetop
between its branches, it lifted up its heart
because of its height. 11 I have given it into the
hand of a mighty one of the nations, to deal with
it according to what its wickedness deserves. I
have thrown it out. 12 Foreigners who were the
terror of all the nations cut it off and left it to
die. Its branches fell on the mountains and all
the valleys, and its boughs lay broken in all the
ravines of the land. Then all the nations on earth
came out from under its shade and they went
away from it.
13 All the birds of the sky rested on the trunk of
the fallen tree,
and every animal of the field came to its
branches.

Ezekiel 31:14

lxxxviii

Ezekiel 32:1

14 This happened so that no other trees that

grow by the waters will lift up their foliage to
the height of the tallest trees, and that no other
trees that grow beside the waters will reach up
to that height. All of them have been assigned to
death, to the earth below, among the children of
humanity, with those that go down to the pit.
15 The Lord Yahweh says this: On the day
when the cedar went down to Sheol I brought
mourning to the earth. I covered the deep waters
over it, and I held back the ocean waters. I kept
back the great waters, and I brought mourning
to Lebanon for him. So all the trees of the field
mourned because of it. 16 I brought shuddering
to the nations at the sound of its downfall, when
I threw it down to Sheol with those who went
down into the pit. So I comforted all the trees
of Eden in the lowest parts of the earth. These
had been the choicest and best trees of Lebanon;
the trees that drank the waters. 17 For they also
went down with it to Sheol, to the ones who had
been killed by the sword. These were its strong
arm, those nations who had lived in its shade.
18 Which of the trees in Eden was your equal
in glory and greatness? For you will be brought
down with the trees of Eden to the lowest parts
of the earth among the uncircumcised; you will
live with those who were killed by the sword.'
This is Pharaoh and all of his multitudes—this
is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.”

32

1 Then it happened in the twelfth month of the

twelfth year, on the first of the month, that the

Ezekiel 32:2

lxxxix

Ezekiel 32:9

word of Yahweh came to me, saying, 2 “Son of
man, lift up a lament concerning Pharaoh the
king of Egypt; say to him, 'You are like a young
lion among the nations,
but you are like a monster in the seas; you churn
up the water,
you stir up the waters with your feet and muddy
their waters. 3 The Lord Yahweh says this:
So I will spread my net over you in the assembly
of many peoples, and they will lift you up
in my net.
4 I will abandon you in the land. I will throw you
into a field
and cause all the birds of the heavens to settle
on you; the hunger of all living animals
on earth will be satisfied by you.
5 For I will put your flesh on the mountains, and
I will fill the valleys with your worm-filled
corpse.
6 Then I will pour your blood over the mountains,
and the stream beds will be filled with your
blood.
7 Then when I extinguish you, I will cover the
heavens and darken their stars;
I will cover the sun with clouds, and the moon
will not shine its light.
8 All the shining lights in the heavens I will
darken over you,
and I will put darkness over your land—this
is the Lord Yahweh's declaration. 9 So I
will terrify the heart of many peoples in
lands that you do not know, when I bring
about your collapse among the nations,

Ezekiel 32:10

xc

Ezekiel 32:16

among lands that you have not known. *
10 I will shock many peoples concerning
you; their kings will shudder in horror
concerning you when I swing my sword
before them. Every moment each one will
tremble because of you, on the day of your
downfall.
11 For the Lord Yahweh says this: The sword of
the king of Babylon will come against you.
12 I will cause your multitudes to fall by warriors'
swords—each warrior a terror of nations.
These warriors will devastate the pride of Egypt
and destroy all of its multitudes.
13 For I will destroy all the livestock from beside
the plentiful waters;
the foot of man will no longer stir the waters up,
neither will the hooves of cattle stir them.
14 Then I will calm their waters and make their
rivers run like oil—
this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.
15 When I make the land of Egypt an abandoned
place, when the land is made bare of all its
fullness,
when I attack all the inhabitants in her, they will
know that I am Yahweh.
16 There will be a lament; the daughters of the
nations will lament over her; they will
lament over Egypt,
over all her multitudes they will lament—this is
the Lord Yahweh's declaration.'”
* 32:9 Instead of when I bring about your collapse among the

nations , some ancient and modern versions have when I take
you into captivity among the nations .

Ezekiel 32:17

17 Then

xci

Ezekiel 32:24

it happened in the twelfth year, on
the fifteenth day of the month, that the word of
Yahweh came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, weep for the multitudes of Egypt
and bring them down—
her and the daughters of majestic nations—to
the lowest earth with those who have gone
down to the pit.
19 'Are you really more beautiful than anyone
else? Go down and lie down with the
uncircumcised.'
20 They will fall among those who were killed by
the sword. The sword has been drawn!
She has been given to the sword; they will
seize her and her multitudes.
21 The strongest of the warriors in Sheol will
declare about Egypt and her allies,
'They have come down here! They will lie with
the uncircumcised, with those who were
killed by the sword.'
22 Assyria is there with all her assembly. Her
graves surround her;
all of them were killed by the sword.
23 Those whose graves are set in the recesses of
the pit are there, with all her assembly.
Her graves surround all of those who were killed,
who fell by the sword,
those who brought terror on the land of the
living.
24 Elam is there with all her multitudes. Her
graves surround her; all of them were
killed.

Ezekiel 32:25

xcii

Ezekiel 32:27

Those who fell by the sword, who have gone
down uncircumcised to the lowest parts of
the earth,
who brought their terrors on the land of the
living and who carry their own shame,
together with the ones going down to the
pit.
25 They set a bedroll for Elam and all her
multitudes in the midst of the slain; her
graves surround her.
All of them are uncircumcised, pierced by the
sword, because they had brought their
terrors on the land of the living.
So they carry their own shame, together with the
ones going down to the pit among all those
who have been killed, those who are going
down to the pit. Elam is among all those
who were killed.
26 Meshech, Tubal, and all their multitudes are
there! Their graves surround them.
All of them are uncircumcised, killed by the
sword, because they had brought their
terrors on the land of the living.
27 They do not lie with the fallen warriors of
the uncircumcised who have gone down
to Sheol
with all their weapons of war, and with their
swords placed under their heads
and their iniquities over their bones. For they
were the terror of warriors in the land of
the living.

Ezekiel 32:28

xciii

Ezekiel 33:4

28 So you, Egypt, will be broken in the midst of

the uncircumcised! You will lie alongside
those who were pierced by the sword.
29 Edom is there with her kings and all her
leaders. They have been placed in their strength
with those killed by the sword.
With the
uncircumcised they lie, with those who have
gone down to the pit. 30 The princes of the north
are there—all of them and all the Sidonians
who went down with the ones who had been
pierced. They were powerful and made others
to be afraid, but now they are there in shame,
uncircumcised with those who were pierced by
the sword. They carry their own shame, together
with the ones going down to the pit.
31 Pharaoh will look and be comforted about
all his multitudes who were pierced by the
sword—Pharaoh and all his army—this is the
Lord Yahweh's declaration. 32 I put him as my
terrifying one in the land of the living, but he will
be laid down in the midst of the uncircumcised,
among those pierced by the sword, Pharaoh and
all his multitudes—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.”

33

1 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

2 “Son of man, declare this to your people; say to

them, 'When I bring a sword against any land,
then the people of that land take one man from
among themselves and make him a watchman
for them. 3 He looks for the sword as it comes
on the land, and he blows his horn to warn the
people! 4 If the people hear the sound of the horn

Ezekiel 33:5

xciv

Ezekiel 33:12

but do not pay attention, and if the sword comes
and kills them, then each one's blood is on his
own head. 5 If someone hears the sound of the
horn and pays no attention, his blood is on him;
but if he pays attention, he will save his own life.
6 However, if the watchman sees the sword as
it is coming, but if he does not blow the horn,
with the result that the people are not warned,
and if the sword comes and takes anyone's life,
then that person dies in his own sin, but I will
require his blood from the watchman.'
7 Now you yourself, son of man! I have made
you a watchman for the house of Israel; you
will hear the words from my mouth and warn
them on my behalf. 8 If I say to a wicked person,
'Wicked one, you will surely die!' but if you do
not announce this so as to warn the wicked about
his way, then he who is wicked will die in his
sin, but I will require his blood from your hand!
9 But you, if you warn the wicked about his way,
so that he might turn back from it, and if he does
not turn back from his way, then he will die in
his sin, but you yourself will have saved your
own life.
10 So you, son of man, say to the house of
Israel, 'You are saying this, “Our transgressions
and our sins are on us, and we are decaying in
them! How can we live?”' 11 Say to them, 'As
I live—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—I
do not delight in the death of the wicked, for if
the wicked repents from his way, then he will
live! Repent! Repent from your wicked ways!
For why should you die, house of Israel?' 12 So

Ezekiel 33:13

xcv

Ezekiel 33:21

now you, son of man, say to your people, 'The
righteousness of a righteous person will not save
him if he sins! The wickedness of a wicked
person will not cause him to perish if he repents
from his sin! For the righteous person will not
be able to live because of his righteousness if
he sins. 13 If I say to the righteous, “He will
surely live!” and if he trusts in his righteousness
and then commits injustice, I will not call to
mind any of his righteousness. He will die for
the wickedness he committed. 14 So if I say to
the wicked, “You will surely die,” but if he then
repents from his sins and does what is just and
right— 15 if he restores the loan guarantee that
he wickedly demanded, or if he makes restitution
for what he has stolen, and if he walks in the
statutes that give life and no longer commits
sin—then he will surely live. He will not die.
16 None of the sins that he has committed will
be called to mind for him. He has acted justly
and rightly, and so, he will surely live!
17 But your people say, “The way of the Lord
is not fair!” but it is your ways that are not fair!
18 When the righteous person turns away from
his righteousness and commits sin, then he will
die in it! 19 When the wicked turns away from his
wickedness and does what is just and righteous,
he will live because of those things! 20 But you
people say, “The way of the Lord is not fair!”
I will judge each of you according to his way,
house of Israel!'”
21 It happened in the twelfth year, on the fifth
day of the tenth month of our captivity, that a

Ezekiel 33:22

xcvi

Ezekiel 33:30

fugitive came to me from Jerusalem and said,
“The city has been captured!” 22 The hand of
Yahweh had been on me in the evening before
the fugitive came, and my mouth was opened by
the time that he came to me in the dawn. So my
mouth was open; I was no longer mute!
23 Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 24 “Son of man, the ones inhabiting those
ruins in the land of Israel are talking and say,
'Abraham was only one person, and he inherited
the land, but we are many! The land has been
given to us as a possession.' 25 Therefore say to
them, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: You eat blood,
and you lift up your eyes towards your idols,
then you pour out people's blood. Should you
really possess the land? 26 You have depended
on your swords and have done disgusting things;
each man defiles his neighbor's wife. Should
you really possess the land?' 27 You will say this
to them, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: As I live,
surely the ones in the ruins will fall by the sword,
and I will give those in the fields to the living
creatures as food, and those in fortresses and in
caves will die of plagues. 28 Then I will turn the
land into a desolation and a horror, and the pride
of its might will end, for the mountains of Israel
will be deserted, and there will be no one to pass
through them.' 29 So they will know that I am
Yahweh, when I make the land a desolation and
a waste because of all the abominations that they
have done.
30 So now you, son of man—your people are
saying things about you beside the walls and

Ezekiel 33:31

xcvii

Ezekiel 34:6

the gates of the houses, and each says to one
another—each man to his brother, 'Let us go and
listen to the prophet's word that comes out from
Yahweh!' 31 So my people will come to you, as
they often do, and will sit in front of you and
listen to your words, but they will not obey them.
Right words are in their mouths, but their hearts
are going after unjust profit. 32 For you are like
a lovely song to them, a beautiful sound that is
well played on a stringed instrument, so they will
listen to your words, but none of them will obey
them. 33 So when all of this happens—behold! it
will happen!—then they will know that a prophet
has been among them.”

34

1 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

2 “Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds

of Israel. Prophesy and say to them, 'The Lord
Yahweh says this to the shepherds: Woe to
the shepherds of Israel who are shepherding
themselves. Should not shepherds guard the
flock? 3 You eat the fatty portions and you dress
in wool. You slaughter the fatlings of the flock.
You do not shepherd at all. 4 You have not
strengthened those who have diseases, nor do
you heal the ones who are ill. You do not bind
up the ones who are broken, and you do not
restore the outcasts or seek the lost. Instead, you
rule over them through strength and violence.
5 Then they were scattered without a shepherd,
and they became food for all the living beasts in
the fields, after they were scattered. 6 My flock

Ezekiel 34:7

xcviii

Ezekiel 34:14

strays on all of the mountains and on every high
hill, and it is dispersed over the entire surface of
the earth. Yet no one is searching for them.
7 Therefore, shepherds, hear the word of
Yahweh: 8 As I live—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration—because my flock has become plunder and food for all the beasts in the fields,
because there was no shepherd and none of my
shepherds sought my flock, but the shepherds
guarded themselves and did not shepherd my
flock. 9 Therefore, shepherds, hear the word of
Yahweh: 10 The Lord Yahweh says this: Behold! I
am against the shepherds, and I will require my
flock from their hand. Then I will dismiss them
from shepherding the flock; neither will the
shepherds any longer shepherd themselves since
I will take away my flock from their mouths, so
that my flock will no longer be food for them.
11 For the Lord Yahweh says this: Behold! I
myself will seek out my flock and I will look after
them, 12 like a shepherd seeking his flock on the
day he is within the midst of his scattered flock.
Thus I will seek my flock, and I will rescue them
from all the places where they were scattered
on the day of clouds and darkness. 13 Then I will
bring them out from among the peoples; I will
gather them from the lands and bring them to
their land. I will put them in pastures on the
mountainsides of Israel, by the streams, and in
every settlement in the land. 14 I will put them
in good pastures; the high mountains of Israel
will be their grazing places. They will lie down
there in good places for grazing, in abundant

Ezekiel 34:15

xcix

Ezekiel 34:25

pastures, and they will graze on the mountains
of Israel. 15 I myself will shepherd my flock, and I
myself will make them lie down—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration— 16 I will seek the lost and
restore the outcast. I will bind up the broken
sheep and heal the sick sheep but the fat and the
strong I will destroy. I will shepherd with justice.
17 So now you, my flock—this is what the Lord
Yahweh says—behold, I will be a judge between
sheep and sheep and between rams and male
goats. 18 Is it not enough to feed on the good
pasture, that you must trample down with your
feet what is left of the pasture; and to drink from
clear waters, that you must muddy the rivers
with your feet? 19 Must my sheep eat what you
have trampled with your feet, and drink what
you have muddied with your feet?
20 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this to
them: Behold! I myself will judge between the
fat sheep and the thin ones, 21 for you have
pushed them with your sides and shoulders, and
you have gored all of the weak ones with your
horns until you have scattered them away from
the land. 22 I will save my flock and they will no
longer be plunder, and I will judge between one
sheep and another! 23 I will set over them one
shepherd, my servant David. He will shepherd
them, he will feed them, and he will be their
shepherd. 24 For I, Yahweh, will be their God,
and my servant David will be a prince among
them—I, Yahweh, have declared this.
25 Then I will make a covenant of peace with
them and remove the evil wild animals from

Ezekiel 34:26

c

Ezekiel 35:4

the land, so that they will live securely in the
wilderness and safely sleep in the forests. 26 I will
also bring blessings on them and on the places
around my hill, for I will send out showers in
due season. These will be showers of blessing.
27 Then the trees of the field will produce their
fruit, and the earth will yield its produce. My
sheep will be secure in their land; then they will
know that I am Yahweh, when I break the bars
of their yoke, and when I rescue them from the
hand of those who enslaved them. 28 They will
no longer be plunder for the nations, and the
wild animals on the earth will no longer devour
them. For they will live securely, and no one
will frighten them. 29 For I will provide them
a land known for its crops; so they will not be
victims of famine in the land, and they will not
bear the scorn of the nations. 30 Then they will
know that I, Yahweh their God, am with them.
They are my people, the house of Israel—this is
the Lord Yahweh's declaration. 31 For you are my
sheep, the flock of my pasture, and my people,
and I am your God—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.'”

35

1 Then the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

2 “Son of man, set your face against Mount Seir
and prophesy against it. 3 Say to it, 'The Lord

Yahweh says this: Behold! I am against you,
Mount Seir, and I will strike you with my hand
and make you a desolation and a waste. 4 I will
make your cities ruins, and you yourself will

Ezekiel 35:5

ci

Ezekiel 35:13

become desolate; then you will know that I am
Yahweh. 5 Because you have always been hostile
to the people of Israel, and because you poured
them out into the hands of the sword at the time
of their distress, at the time their punishment
was at its greatest. 6 Therefore, as I live—
this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—I will
prepare you for bloodshed, and bloodshed will
pursue you! Since you did not hate bloodshed,
bloodshed will pursue you. 7 I will make Mount
Seir a complete desolation when I cut off from it
anyone who passes through and returns again.
8 I will fill its mountains with those who were
killed; on your high hills and valleys and in all
your streams those who were killed by the sword
will fall. 9 I will make you a perpetual desolation.
Your cities will not be inhabited, but you will
know that I am Yahweh.
10 You have said, “These two nations and these

two lands will become mine, and we will possess
them,” even when Yahweh was present with
them. 11 Therefore, as I live—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration—so I will do according to
your anger and according to your jealousy that
you had in your hatred of Israel, and I will show
myself to them when I judge you. 12 So you will
know that I am Yahweh. I have heard all the
insults you spoke against the mountains of Israel,
when you said, “They have been destroyed; they
have been given over to us to devour.” 13 You
exalted yourselves against me with what you
said, and you multiplied the words you said
against me; and I heard it all.

Ezekiel 35:14

cii

Ezekiel 36:5

14 The Lord Yahweh says this: I will make you
a desolation, while the entire earth rejoices. 15 As

you rejoiced over the inheritance of the people of
Israel because of its desolation, I will do the same
to you. You will become a desolation, Mount Seir,
and all of Edom—all of it! Then they will know
that I am Yahweh.'”

36

you, son of man, prophesy to the
mountains of Israel and say, 'Mountains of Israel,
2 The Lord
listen to the word of Yahweh.
Yahweh says this: The enemy has said about
you, “Aha!” and “The ancient high places have
become our possession.”' 3 Therefore prophesy
and say, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: Because of
your desolation and because of the attacks that
came on you from all sides, you have become a
possession of the other nations; you have been
the subject of slanderous lips and tongues, and
of people's stories. 4 Therefore, mountains of
Israel, listen to the word of the Lord Yahweh:
The Lord Yahweh says this to the mountains and
the high hills, to the streambeds and valleys,
to the uninhabited desolations and the forsaken
cities that have become plunder and a subject
of mocking for the other nations that surround
them— 5 therefore the Lord Yahweh says this:
I have certainly spoken in the fire of my fury
against the other nations, against Edom and all
who took my land for themselves as a possession,
against all those who had both joy in their heart
and disdain in their spirit, as they seized my
1 “Now

Ezekiel 36:6

ciii

Ezekiel 36:15

land that they might claim its pasturelands for
themselves.' 6 Therefore, prophesy to the land
of Israel and say to the mountains and to the
high hills, to the streambeds and to the valleys,
'the Lord Yahweh says this: Behold! In my fury
and in my anger I am declaring this because you
have borne the insults of nations. 7 Therefore,
the Lord Yahweh says this: I myself will lift up
my hand to swear that the nations that surround
you will certainly carry their own shame.
8 But you, mountains of Israel, you will grow

branches and bear fruit for my people Israel,
since they will soon come back to you. 9 For
behold, I am for you, and I treat you with favor;
you will be plowed and sown with seed. 10 So
I will multiply upon you the number of your
people, even the whole house of Israel. The cities
will be inhabited and the ruins rebuilt. 11 I will
multiply man and beast on you mountains so
that they will multiply and be fruitful. Then I
will cause you to be inhabited as you previously
were, and I will make you prosper more than
you did in the past, for you will know that I am
Yahweh. 12 I will bring men, my people Israel,
to walk on you. They will possess you, and you
will be their inheritance, and you will no longer
cause their children to die. 13 The Lord Yahweh
says this: Because they are saying to you, “You
devour men, bereaving your nation of children,”
14 therefore you will not consume people any
longer, and you will no longer make your nation
mourn their deaths. This is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration. 15 Nor will I allow you to hear the

Ezekiel 36:16

civ

Ezekiel 36:24

insults of the nations any longer; you will no
longer have to bear the shame of the peoples
or cause your nation to fall—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration.'”
16 Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 17 “Son of man, when the house of Israel
inhabited their land, they defiled it with their
ways and their deeds. Their ways were like the
unclean menstruation of a woman before me.
18 So I poured out my fury against them for the
blood that they poured out on the land and for
their pollution of it by their idols. 19 I scattered
them among the nations; they were dispersed
through the lands. I judged them according to
their ways and their deeds. 20 Then they went
to the nations, and wherever they went, they
profaned my holy name when people said of
them, 'Are these really the people of Yahweh?
For they have been thrown out of his land.' 21 But
I had compassion for my holy name that the
house of Israel had defiled among the nations,
when they went there.
22 Therefore say to the house of Israel, 'The
Lord Yahweh says this: I am not doing this for
your sake, house of Israel, but for my holy name,
which you have profaned among the nations
everywhere you have gone. 23 For I will make
my great name holy, which you have profaned
among the nations—in the midst of the nations,
you profaned it. Then the nations will know
that I am Yahweh—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration—when you see that I am holy. 24 I
will take you from the nations and gather you

Ezekiel 36:25

cv

Ezekiel 36:35

from every land, and I will bring you to your
land. 25 Then I will sprinkle pure water on you so
you will be purified from all of your impurities,
and I will purify you from all of your idols. 26 I
will give you a new heart and a new spirit in your
innermost parts, and I will take away the heart of
stone from your flesh. For I will give you a heart
of flesh. 27 I will set my Spirit in you and enable
you to walk in my statutes and keep my decrees,
so you will do them. 28 Then you will inhabit
the land that I gave to your ancestors; you will
be my people, and I will be your God. 29 For I
will save you from all of your uncleanness. I
will summon the grain and multiply it. I will no
longer put famine upon you. 30 I will multiply the
fruit of the tree and the produce of the field so
that you will no longer bear the shame of famine
among the nations. 31 Then you will think of
your wicked ways and your deeds that were not
good, and you will show loathing on your faces
because of your own sins and your disgusting
deeds.
32 I am not doing this for your sake—this is the
Lord Yahweh's declaration—let this be known to
you. So be ashamed and disgraced because of
your ways, house of Israel. 33 The Lord Yahweh
says this: On the day that I purify you from
all your iniquity, I will cause you to inhabit the
cities and to rebuild the ruined places. 34 For you
will plow the ruined land until it is no longer a
ruin before the eyes of all who pass by. 35 Then
they will say, “This land was desolate, but it has
become like the garden of Eden; the desolate

Ezekiel 36:36

cvi

Ezekiel 37:6

cities and the uninhabited ruins that were torn
down are now fortified and inhabited.” 36 Then
the other nations around you will know that I am
Yahweh, that I built up the ruins and replanted
the abandoned places. I am Yahweh. I have
declared it and I will do it.
37 The Lord Yahweh says this: Again I will be
asked by the house of Israel to do this for them,
to increase them like a flock of people. 38 Like
the flock is set apart for sacrifices, like the flock
in Jerusalem at her appointed feasts, so will the
ruined cities be filled with flocks of people and
they will know that I am Yahweh.'”

37

1 The hand of Yahweh was upon me, and he

brought me out by the Spirit of Yahweh and set
me down in the midst of a valley; it was full of
bones. 2 Then he made me pass through them
round and round. Behold! A great many of them
were in the valley. Behold! They were very dry.
3 He said to me, “Son of man, can these bones
live again?” So I said, “Lord Yahweh, you alone
know.” 4 Then he said to me, “Prophesy over
these bones and say to them, 'Dry bones. Listen
to the word of Yahweh. 5 The Lord Yahweh says
this to these bones: Behold! I am about to put
breath into you, and you will live. 6 I will place
sinews over you and bring flesh onto you. I will
cover you with skin and put breath within you
so you will live. Then you will know that I am
Yahweh.'”

Ezekiel 37:7

7 So

cvii

Ezekiel 37:16

I prophesied as I was commanded; as
I prophesied, behold, a sound came, that of
shaking. Then the bones drew together—bone
against bone. 8 I looked and, behold, sinews
were now on them, and flesh grew up and skin
covered them. But there was still no breath in
them. 9 Then Yahweh said to me, “Prophesy to
the breath, prophesy, son of man, and say to
the breath, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: Breath,
come from the four winds, and breathe on these
who have been killed, so they may live.'” 10 So
I prophesied as I was commanded; the breath
came into them and they lived. Then they stood
on their feet, a very great army.
11 Then Yahweh said to me, “Son of man, these
bones are the entire house of Israel. Behold!
They are saying, 'Our bones have dried up,
and our hope is gone. We have been cut off.'
12 Therefore prophesy and say to them, 'The Lord
Yahweh says this: Behold! I will open your
graves and lift you out from them, my people. I
will bring you back to the land of Israel. 13 Then
you will know that I am Yahweh, when I open
your graves and bring you out from them, my
people. 14 I will place my Spirit within you so
you will live, and I will cause you to rest in your
land when you know that I am Yahweh. I declare
and will do it—this is Yahweh's declaration.'”
15 Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, 16 “So now you, son of man, take one
stick for yourself and write on it, 'For Judah
and for the people of Israel, his companions.'
Then take another stick and write on it, 'For

Ezekiel 37:17

cviii

Ezekiel 37:23

Joseph, the branch of Ephraim, and for all the
people of Israel, their companions.' 17 Bring
both of them together into one stick, so that
they become one in your hand. 18 When your
people speak to you and say, 'Will you not tell us
what these things of yours mean?' 19 then say to
them, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: Behold! I am
taking the branch of Joseph that is in the hand of
Ephraim and the tribes of Israel his companions
and joining it to the branch of Judah, so that they
will make one branch, and they will become one
in my hand.' 20 Hold in your hand the branches
that you wrote on before their eyes.
21 Declare to them, 'The Lord Yahweh says
this: Behold! I am about to take the people
of Israel from among the nations where they
went. I will gather them from the surrounding
lands and I will bring them to their land. 22 I
will make them one nation in the land, on
the mountains of Israel, and there will be one
king as king over all of them, and they will no
longer be two nations. They will no longer be
divided into two kingdoms. 23 Then they will no
longer defile themselves with their idols, their
disgusting things, or any of their other sins. For I
will save them from all of their faithless actions
with which they have sinned, and I will purify
them, so they will be my people and I will be
their God. *
* 37:23 Some ancient and most modern versions read in this

way: from all of their faithless actions . However, the Hebrew
text reads from their dwelling places , which many think makes
little sense in this context.

Ezekiel 37:24

cix

Ezekiel 38:6

24 David my servant will be king over them. So

there will be one shepherd over them all, and
they will walk according to my decrees and they
will keep my statutes and obey them. 25 They
will live in the land that I have given to my
servant Jacob, where your fathers had stayed.
They will live in it forever—they, their children,
and their grandchildren, for David my servant
will be their chief forever. 26 I will establish
a covenant of peace with them. It will be an
everlasting covenant with them. I will establish
them and multiply them and set my holy place in
their midst forever. 27 My dwelling place will be
with them; I will be their God, and they will be
my people. 28 Then the nations will know that I
am Yahweh who sets Israel apart, when my holy
place is among them forever.'”
1 The

38

word of Yahweh came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, set your face toward Gog, the
land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and
Tubal; and prophesy against him. 3 Say, 'The
Lord Yahweh says this: Behold! I am against you,
Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal. 4 So I
will turn you around and set hooks in your jaw;
I will send you out with all your army, horses,
and horsemen, all of them dressed in full armor,
a great company with large shields and small
shields, all of them holding swords! 5 Persia,
Cush, and Libya are with them, all of them with
shields and helmets! 6 Gomer and all her troops,
and Beth Togarmah, from the far parts of the

Ezekiel 38:7

cx

Ezekiel 38:13

north, and all its troops! Many peoples are with
you!
7 Get ready! Yes, prepare yourself and your
troops assembled with you, and be their commander. 8 You will be called after many days,
and after some years you will go to a land
that has recovered from the sword and that
has been gathered from many peoples, gathered
back to the mountains of Israel that had been a
continuous ruin. But the land's people will be
brought out of the peoples, and they will live in
safety, all of them! 9 So you will go up as a storm
goes; you will be like a cloud covering the land,
you and all your troops, all the many soldiers
with you.
10 The Lord Yahweh says this: It will happen on
that day that plans will form in your heart, and
you will devise wicked schemes.' 11 Then you will
say, 'I will go up to the open land; I will go to the
quiet people living in safety, all of them living
where there are no walls or bars, and where
there are no city gates. 12 I will capture booty
and steal plunder, in order to bring my hand
against the ruins that are newly inhabited, and
against the people gathered from the nations,
people who are gaining livestock and property,
and who are living at the center of the earth.'
13 Sheba and Dedan, and the traders of Tarshish
along with all its young warriors will say to you,
'Have you come to plunder? Have you assembled
your armies to take away spoil, to carry off silver
and gold, to take their livestock and property and
to haul away much plunder?'

Ezekiel 38:14

cxi

Ezekiel 38:22

14 Therefore prophesy, son of man, and say to

Gog, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: On that day,
when my people Israel are living securely, will
you not learn about them? 15 You will come
from your place far away in the north with a
great army, all of them riding on horses, a great
company, a large army. 16 You will attack my
people Israel like a cloud that covers the land.
In the latter days I will bring you against my
land, so the nations might know me when I show
myself through you, Gog, to be holy before their
eyes.
17 The

Lord Yahweh says this: Are you not
the one of whom I spoke in former days by the
hand of my servants, the prophets of Israel, who
prophesied in their own time for years that I
would bring you against them? 18 So it will come
to be in that day when Gog attacks the land of
Israel—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—
my wrath will mount up in my anger. 19 In my
zeal and in the fire of my anger, I declare that on
that day there will be a great earthquake in the
land of Israel. 20 They will shake before me—
the fish of the sea and the birds of the skies,
the beasts of the fields, and all the creatures
that crawl on the earth, and every person who
is on the surface of the land. The mountains
will be thrown down and the cliffs will fall, until
every wall falls to the earth. 21 I will summon
a sword against him on all my mountains—this
is the Lord Yahweh's declaration—each man's
sword will be against his brother. 22 Then I will
judge him by plague and blood; and overflowing

Ezekiel 38:23

cxii

Ezekiel 39:9

rain and hailstones and burning sulfur I will rain
down upon him and his troops and the many
nations that are with him. 23 For I will show my
greatness and my holiness and I will make myself
known in the eyes of the many nations, and they
will know that I am Yahweh.'”

39

1 “Now you, son of man, prophesy against Gog

and say, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: Behold!
I am against you, Gog, chief of Meshech and
Tubal. 2 I will turn you and lead you on; I will
bring you up from the far north and bring you
to the mountains of Israel. 3 Then I will knock
your bow out of your left hand and make the
arrows fall from your right hand. 4 You will fall
on the mountains of Israel—you and all your
troops and the soldiers who are with you. I
will give you to the birds of prey and the wild
beasts of the fields for food. 5 You will fall on
the open field, for I myself declare it—this is
the Lord Yahweh's declaration. 6 Then I will
send out fire on Magog and on those living in
safety on the coasts, and they will know that I am
Yahweh. 7 For I will make my holy name known
in the midst of my people Israel, and I will no
longer allow my holy name to be profaned; the
nations will know that I am Yahweh, the Holy
One in Israel. 8 Behold! The day is coming,
and it will take place—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration. 9 The ones living in the cities of
Israel will go out and they will use weapons
to kindle and make fires and burn them—small

Ezekiel 39:10

cxiii

Ezekiel 39:17

shields, large shields, bows, arrows, the clubs
and spears; they will make fires with them for
seven years. 10 They will not gather wood from
the fields or cut down trees from the forests,
since they will burn the weapons; they will
take from those who wanted to take from them;
they will plunder those who wanted to plunder
them—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.”
11 Then it will happen on that day that I will
make a place there for Gog—a grave in Israel,
a valley for those who journey to the east of
the sea. It will block those who wish to cross
over. There they will bury Gog with all his
multitudes. They will call it the Valley of Hamon
Gog. 12 For seven months the house of Israel will
bury them in order to purify the land. 13 For
all the people of the land will bury them; it
will be a memorable day for them when I am
glorified—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.
14 Then they will designate men to continually
go through the land, to find those who were
traveling through, but who died and their bodies
remained on the surface of the land, so that they
may bury them, in order to cleanse the land. At
the end of the seventh month they will begin
their search. 15 As these men pass through the
land, when they see any human bone, they will
put a marker by it, until gravediggers come and
bury it in the Valley of Hamon Gog. 16 There will
be a city there by the name of Hamonah. In this
way they will purify the land.
17 Now to you, son of man, the Lord Yahweh
says this: Say to all the winged birds and all the

Ezekiel 39:18

cxiv

Ezekiel 39:26

wild beasts in the fields, 'Gather together and
come. Gather from all around to the sacrifice
that I myself am making for you, a large sacrifice
on the mountains of Israel, so that you may
consume flesh and drink blood. 18 You will
consume the flesh of warriors and drink the
blood of the princes of the earth; they will be
rams, lambs, goats, and bulls, they were all
fattened in Bashan. 19 Then you will eat fat
to your satisfaction; you will drink blood until
drunkenness; this will be the sacrifice that I
will slaughter for you. 20 You will be satisfied
at my table with horse, chariot, warrior, and
every man of war—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.'
21 I will set my glory among the nations, and all
the nations will see my judgment that I perform
and my hand that I have set against them. 22 The
house of Israel will know that I am Yahweh their
God from that day onward. 23 The nations will
know that the house of Israel went into captivity
because of their iniquity by which they betrayed
me, so I hid my face from them and gave them
into the hand of their adversaries so that all of
them fell by the sword. 24 I did to them according
to their uncleanness and their sins, when I hid
my face from them.
25 Therefore the Lord Yahweh says this: Now I
will restore the fortunes of Jacob, and I will have
compassion on all the house of Israel, when I act
with zeal for my holy name. 26 Then they will
bear their shame and all the treason in which
they betrayed me. They will forget all this when
they rest in their land in safety, with no one to

Ezekiel 39:27

cxv

Ezekiel 40:5

terrify them. 27 When I restore them from the
peoples and gather them from the lands of their
enemies, I will show myself to be holy in the
sight of many nations. 28 Then they will know
that I am Yahweh their God, for I sent them
into captivity among the nations, but then I will
gather them back to their land. I will not leave
any of them among the nations. 29 I will no
longer hide my face from them when I pour out
my Spirit on the house of Israel—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration.”

40

1 In the twenty-fifth year of our captivity at the

beginning of the year on the tenth day of the
month, in the fourteenth year after the city was
captured—on that same day, the hand of Yahweh
was upon me and he took me there. 2 In visions
from God he brought me to the land of Israel. He
brought me to rest on a very high mountain; to
the south were what appeared to be buildings of
a city. 3 Then he brought me there. Behold, a
man! His appearance was like the appearance
of bronze. A linen cord and a measuring stick
were in his hand, and he stood in the city gate.
4 The man said to me, “Son of man, look with
your eyes and listen with your ears, and fix your
mind on all that I am revealing to you, for you
were brought here so I could reveal them to you.
Report everything that you will see to the house
of Israel.”
5 There was a wall surrounding the temple
area. The length of the measuring stick in the

Ezekiel 40:6

cxvi

Ezekiel 40:13

man's hand was six long cubits. Each long cubit
was a cubit and a handbreadth in length. So he
measured the wall, and it was one measuring
stick thick and one rod high. 6 Then he went to
the temple gate that faced east. He went up its
steps and measured the threshold of the gate—
one stick in depth. * 7 The guard chambers
were each one stick in length and one stick in
width; there were five cubits between any two
of the chambers, and the threshold of the temple
gate by the temple portico was one stick deep.
8 He measured the portico of the gate; it was
one stick in length. 9 He measured the portico
of the gate. It was one stick deep. The doorposts
were two cubits in width. This was the portico of
the gate facing the temple. 10 There were three
guard chambers on either side of the east gate,
and each of them had the same measurement,
and the walls that separated them had the same
measurement. 11 Then the man measured the
width of the gateway entrance—ten cubits; and
he measured the length of the gateway entrance—thirteen cubits. 12 He measured the wall
that was bordering the front of the chambers—
one cubit high. The chambers measured six
cubits on each side. 13 Then he measured the
gateway from the roof of one chamber to that
of the next chamber—twenty-five cubits, from
the entrance of the first chamber to that of the
* 40:6

After one stick in depth , the Hebrew text reads in
addition: one threshold one stick in depth” . Many modern
versions, however, leave this expression out, because it seems
to be a repetition of preceding text.

Ezekiel 40:14

cxvii

Ezekiel 40:23

second. 14 Then he measured the wall that went
between the guard chambers—sixty cubits in
length; he measured as far as the gate's portico.
15 The entrance from the front of the gate to
the other end of the gate's portico was fifty
cubits. 16 There were closed windows toward
the chambers and toward their pillars within the
gates all around; and likewise for the porches.
The were windows all around the inside, and
each jamb was decorated with palm trees.
17 Then the man brought me to the outer courtyard of the temple. Behold, there were rooms,
and there was pavement in the courtyard, with
thirty rooms next to the pavement. 18 The
pavement went up to the side of the gates, and its
width was the same as the gates' length. This was
the lower pavement. 19 Then the man measured
the distance from the front of the lower gate to
the front of the inner gate; it was one hundred
cubits on the east side, and the same on the north
side.
20 Then he measured the length and width of
the gate that was at the north of the outer court.
21 There were three chambers on either side of
that gate, and the gate and its portico measured
the same as the main gate—fifty cubits in total
length and twenty-five cubits in width. 22 Its
windows, portico, chambers, and its palm trees
corresponded to the gate that faced east. Seven
steps went up to it and to its portico. 23 There
was a gate to the inner courtyard in front of the
gate facing north, just as also there was a gate to
the east; the man measured from one gate to the

Ezekiel 40:24

cxviii

Ezekiel 40:33

other gate—one hundred cubits in distance.
24 Next the man brought me to the gate of
the southern entrance, and its walls and portico
measured the same as the other outer gates.
25 There were closed windows in the gateway
and its portico just as at that gate. The south gate
and its portico measured fifty cubits in length
and twenty-five cubits in width. 26 There were
seven steps up to the gate and its portico, and
there were carvings of palm trees on the walls
on either side. 27 There was a gate to the inner
courtyard on the southern side, and the man
measured from that gate to the gate of the south
entrance—one hundred cubits in distance.
28 Then the man brought me to the inner
courtyard by way of its southern gate, which
had the same measurements as the other gates.
29 Its chambers, walls, and porticos measured the
same as the other gates; there were windows
all around in the portico. The inner gate and
its portico measured fifty cubits in length and
twenty-five cubits in width. 30 There were also
porticos all around the inner wall; these were
twenty-five cubits in length and five cubits in
width. 31 This portico faced the outer courtyard
with carved palm trees on its walls and eight
steps going up to it.
32 Then the man brought me to the inner
courtyard by the eastern way and measured the
gate, which had the same measurements as the
other gates. 33 Its chambers, walls, and portico
measured the same as the other gates, and there
were windows all around. The inner gate and

Ezekiel 40:34

cxix

Ezekiel 40:43

its portico measured fifty cubits in length and
twenty-five cubits in width. 34 Its portico faced
the outer courtyard; it had palm trees on either
side of it and eight steps going up it.
35 Next the man brought me to the northern
gate and measured it; it measured the same
36 Its chambers, walls,
as the other gates.
and portico measured the same as the other
gates, and there were windows all around. The
gateway and its portico measured fifty cubits in
length and twenty-five cubits in width. 37 Its
portico faced the outer courtyard; it had palm
trees on either side of it and eight steps going up
it.
38 There was a room with a door by each of the
inner gateways. This was where they rinsed the
burnt offerings. 39 There were two tables on each
side of each portico, on which the burnt offering
was slaughtered, and also the sin offering and
the guilt offering. 40 By the wall of the courtyard,
going up to the gate to the north, there were two
tables. Also on the other side there were two
tables at the gate's portico. 41 There were four
tables on either side by the gate; they slaughtered
animals on the eight tables. 42 There were four
tables of cut stone for the burnt offerings, one
and a half cubits in length, one and a half cubits
in width, and one cubit tall. On them they
laid the tools with which they slaughtered the
burnt offerings for the sacrifices. 43 Two-pronged
hooks a handbreadth in length were fastened
in the portico all around, and the flesh of the
offerings would be put on the tables.

Ezekiel 40:44

cxx

Ezekiel 41:1

44 On the outside of the inner gate, within the

inner courtyard, were singers' chambers, one on
the north side facing south, and the other on the
south side facing north. 45 Then the man said
to me, “This room facing south is for the priests
who are on duty in the temple. 46 The room
facing north is for the priests on duty at the altar.
These are the sons of Zadok who come near to
Yahweh to serve him; they are among the sons
of Levi.” 47 Next he measured the courtyard—
one hundred cubits in length and one hundred
cubits in width in a square, with the altar in front
of the house.
48 Then the man brought me to the portico
of the house and measured its doorposts—they
were five cubits thick on either side.
The
entryway itself was fourteen cubits in width, and
the walls on each side of it were three cubits in
width. † 49 The length of the portico was twenty
cubits, and its depth was eleven cubits. There
were steps that went up to it and columns that
stood on either side of it. ‡ §

41

1 Then the man brought me into the temple's

holy place and measured the doorposts—six
† 40:48 Instead of the walls on each side of it were three cubits

in width , the Hebrew text reads the entrance was three cubits in
width , but this seems to be a mistake, judging from the preceding
‡ 40:49 Instead of steps , some ancient
words in this verse.

§ 40:49 Instead of
and modern versions read ten steps .
eleven cubits , some ancient and modern versions read twelve
cubits .

Ezekiel 41:2

cxxi

Ezekiel 41:9

cubits in width on either side. * 2 The width
of the doorway was ten cubits; the wall on each
side was five cubits in length. Then the man
measured the dimensions of the holy place—
forty cubits in length and twenty cubits in width.
3 Then the man went into the very holy place and
measured the posts of the doorway—two cubits,
and the doorway was six cubits in width. The
walls on either side were seven cubits in width.
4 Then he measured the room's length—twenty
cubits. Its width—twenty cubits to the front of
the temple hall. Then he said to me, “This is the
most holy place.”
5 Then the man measured the wall of the
house—it was six cubits thick. The width of each
side room around the house was four cubits in
width. 6 There were side rooms on three levels,
one room above another, thirty rooms on each
level. There were ledges around the wall of the
house, to support all of the side rooms, for there
was no support put in the wall of the house. 7 So
the side rooms widened and went around going
up, for the house went around higher and higher
all around; the rooms widened as the house went
up, and a stairway went up to the highest level,
through the middle level. 8 Then I saw a raised
part all around the house, the foundation for
the side chambers; it measured a full stick in
height—six cubits. 9 The width of the wall of the
side rooms on the outside was five cubits. There
was an open space to the outside of these rooms
* 41:1 After six cubits in width on either side , most ancient
copies and some modern versions add the width of the tent .

Ezekiel 41:10

cxxii

Ezekiel 41:19

in the sanctuary. 10 On the other side of this
open space were the priests' outer side rooms;
this space was twenty cubits in width all around
the sanctuary. 11 There were doors into the side
rooms from another open space—one doorway
was on the north side, and the other on the south
side. The width of this open area was five cubits
all around.
12 The building that faced the courtyard on
the west side was seventy cubits in width. Its
wall measured five cubits thick all around, and
it was ninety cubits in length. 13 Then the man
measured the sanctuary—one hundred cubits in
length. The separated building, its wall, and the
courtyard also measured one hundred cubits in
length. 14 The width of the front of the courtyard
in front of the sanctuary was also one hundred
cubits.
15 Then the man measured the length of the
building behind the sanctuary, to its west, and
the galleries on either side—one hundred cubits.
The holy place and the portico, 16 the inner
walls and the windows, including the narrow
windows, and the galleries all around on three
levels, were all paneled in wood. 17 Above the
entryway to the inner sanctuary and spaced
along the walls there was a measured pattern.
18 It was decorated with cherubim and palm
trees; with a palm tree between each cherub, and
each cherub had two faces: 19 the face of a man
looked toward a palm tree on one side, and the
face of a young lion looked toward a palm tree on
the other side. They were carved all around the

Ezekiel 41:20

cxxiii

Ezekiel 42:3

entire house. 20 From the ground to above the
doorway, cherubim and palm trees were carved
on the outer wall of the house.
21 The gate posts of the holy place were square.
Their appearance was like the appearance of
22 the wooden altar in front of the holy place,
which was three cubits high and two cubits in
length on each side. Its corner posts, base,
and frame were made of wood. Then the man
said to me, “This is the table that stands before
Yahweh.” † 23 There were double doors for the
holy place and the most holy place. 24 These
doors had two hinged door panels each, two
panels for one door and two panels for the other.
25 Carved on them—on the doors of the holy
place—were cherubim and palm trees just as the
walls were decorated, and there was a wooden
roof over the portico at the front. 26 There were
narrow windows and palm trees on either side
of the portico. These were the side rooms of the
house, and they also had overhanging roofs.
1 Next

42

the man sent me out to the outer
courtyard on the north side, and he brought me
to rooms in front of the outer courtyard and the
northern outer wall. 2 Those rooms were one
hundred cubits along their front and fifty cubits
in width. 3 Some of those rooms faced the inner
courtyard and were twenty cubits away from the
† 41:22 Instead of Their appearance was like the appearance
of the wooden altar in front of the holy place, which was ,
some modern versions have They all looked like each other. The
wooden altar in front of the holy place was .

Ezekiel 42:4

cxxiv

Ezekiel 42:11

sanctuary. There were three levels of rooms, and
the ones above looked down on the ones below
and were open to them, having a walkway. Some
of the rooms looked out onto the outer courtyard.
4 A passage ten cubits in width and one hundred
cubits in length ran in front of the rooms. The
rooms' doors were toward the north. * 5 But
the upper halls were smaller, for the walkways
took away from them more space than they did
in the lowest and middle levels of the building.
6 For the halls on the third story had no columns,
unlike the courtyards, which did have columns.
So the highest level's rooms were smaller in size
compared to the rooms in the lowest and middle
levels. 7 The outside wall ran along the rooms
toward the outer courtyard, the courtyard that
was in front of the rooms. That wall was fifty
cubits in length. 8 The length of the rooms of the
outer courtyard was fifty cubits, and the rooms
facing the sanctuary were one hundred cubits in
length. 9 There was an entrance to the lowest
rooms from the east side, coming from the outer
courtyard.
10 Along the wall of the outer courtyard on
the eastern side of the outer courtyard, in front
of the sanctuary's inner courtyard, there were
also rooms † 11 with a walkway in front of them.
* 42:4 Some ancient versions and many modern versions read

one hundred cubits . Ancient Hebrew copies and some modern
† 42:10 Hebrew and some modern
versions read one cubit .
versions read on the eastern side . However, some ancient copies
and most modern versions read on the southern side .

Ezekiel 42:12

cxxv

Ezekiel 42:17

They were as the appearance of the rooms on the
northern side. They had the same length and
breadth and the same exits and arrangements
and doors. 12 On the south side were doors into
rooms that were just the same as on the north
side. A passage on the inside had a door at its
head, and the passage opened into the various
rooms. On the east side there was a doorway
into the passage at one end.
13 Then the man said to me,

“The northern
rooms and the southern rooms that are in front
of the outer courtyard are holy rooms where the
priests who work nearest to Yahweh may eat
the most holy food. They will put the most holy
things there—the food offering, the sin offering,
and the guilt offering—for this is a holy place.
14 When the priests enter there, they must not go
out of the holy place to the outer court, without
laying aside the clothes in which they served,
since these are holy. So they must dress in other
clothes before going near the people.”
15 The

man completed measuring the inner
house and then took me out to the gate that
faced the east and measured all the surrounding
area there. 16 He measured the east side with
a measuring stick—five hundred cubits with the
measuring stick. ‡ 17 He measured the north
side—five hundred cubits with the measuring
‡ 42:16

Instead of five hundred cubits , which some ancient
and most modern versions read, Hebrew reads five hundred
measuring sticks , which seems to be an error.

Ezekiel 42:18

cxxvi

Ezekiel 43:5

stick. § 18 He also measured the south side—
five hundred cubits with the measuring stick. *
19 He also turned and measured the west side—
five hundred cubits with the measuring stick. †
20 He measured it on four sides. It had a wall
around it that was five hundred cubits in length,
and five hundred cubits in width, to separate the
holy from that which is common.

43

1 The man then brought me to the gate that
opened to the east. 2 Behold! The glory of the

God of Israel came from the east; his voice was
like the sound of many waters, and the earth
shone with his glory. 3 It was according to the
appearance of the vision that I saw, according
to the vision that I saw when he had come * to
destroy the city, and the visions were like the
vision that I saw at the Kebar Canal—and I fell
to my face. 4 So the glory of Yahweh came to
the house by way of the gate that opened to the
east. 5 Then the Spirit lifted me up and brought
§ 42:17

Instead of five hundred cubits, which some ancient
and most modern versions read, Hebrew reads five hundred

measuring sticks , which seems to be an error. * 42:18 Instead
of five hundred cubits , which some ancient and most modern
versions read, Hebrew reads five hundred measuring sticks ,
† 42:19 Instead of five hundred
which seems to be an error.
cubits , which some ancient and most modern versions read,
Hebrew reads five hundred measuring sticks , which seems to be

* 43:3 Instead of when he had come, which some
an error.
Hebrew copies and some ancient and many modern versions
read, the Hebrew reads when I came .

Ezekiel 43:6

cxxvii

Ezekiel 43:12

me into the inner court. Behold! The glory of
Yahweh was filling the house.
6 The man was standing beside me, and I heard
someone else speaking to me from the house.
7 He said to me, “Son of man, this is the place
of my throne and the place for the soles of
my feet, where I will live in the midst of the
people of Israel forever. The house of Israel
will no longer profane my holy name—they or
their kings—with their faithlessness or with the
corpses of their kings at their high places. 8 They
will no longer profane my holy name by putting
their threshold next to my threshold, and their
gateposts next to my gateposts, with nothing but
a wall between me and them. They profaned
my holy name with their disgusting actions, so
I consumed them with my anger. 9 Now let them
remove their faithlessness and the corpses of
their kings from before me, and I will live in their
midst forever.
10 Son of man, you yourself must tell the house
of Israel about this house so they will be ashamed
of their iniquities. They should think about this
description. 11 For if they are ashamed of all that
they have done, then reveal to them the design
of the house, its details, its exits, its entrances,
and all its designs, all its decrees and rules. Then
write this down before their eyes so they will
keep to all its design and all its rules, so as to
obey them. 12 This is the regulation for the house:
From the peak of the hill to all the surrounding
border around it, it will be most holy. Behold!
This is the regulation for the house.

Ezekiel 43:13

cxxviii

Ezekiel 43:21

13 These will be the measurements of the altar

in cubits—that cubit being a regular cubit and a
handbreadth in length. So the gutter around the
altar will be a cubit deep, and its width will also
be a cubit. The border around its surrounding
edge will be one span. This will be the base of the
altar. 14 From the gutter at the ground level up to
the lower ledge of the altar is two cubits, and that
ledge itself is one cubit in width. Then from the
small ledge up to the large edge of the altar, it is
four cubits, and the large edge is a cubit in width.
15 The hearth on the altar for the burnt offerings
is four cubits high, and there are four horns
pointing upward on the hearth. 16 The hearth
is twelve cubits in length and twelve cubits in
width, a square. 17 Its border is fourteen cubits
in length and fourteen cubits in width on each of
its four sides, and its rim is a half cubit in width.
The gutter is a cubit in width all around with its
steps facing east.”
18 Next he said to me, “Son of man, the Lord
Yahweh says this: These are the regulations for
the altar on the day they make it, for raising the
burnt offering onto it, and for sprinkling blood
on it. 19 You will give a bull from the cattle as
a sin offering for the Levitical priests who are
the descendants of Zadok, those who come near
to me to serve me—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration. 20 Then you will take some of its
blood and place it on the altar's four horns and
the four sides of its edge and on the surrounding
rim; you will cleanse it and make atonement
for it. 21 Then take the bull for the sin offering

Ezekiel 43:22

cxxix

Ezekiel 44:3

and burn it in the appointed part of the temple
area outside of the sanctuary. 22 Then on the
second day you will offer a male goat without
blemish from the goats as a sin offering; the
priests will cleanse the altar just as they cleansed
it with the bull. 23 When you finish its cleansing,
offer an unblemished bull from the cattle and
an unblemished ram from the flock. 24 Offer
them before Yahweh; the priests will throw salt
onto them and raise them up as a burnt offering
to Yahweh. 25 You must prepare a male goat
as a sin offering daily for seven days, and the
priests must also prepare an unblemished bull
of the cattle and unblemished ram from the
flock. 26 They must atone for the altar for seven
days and purify it, and in this way they must
consecrate it. 27 They must complete these days,
and on the eighth day and onward it will come
about that the priests will prepare your burnt
offerings and your peace offerings on the altar,
and I will accept you—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.”

44

1 Then the man brought me back to the outer

sanctuary gate that faced east; it was closed
tightly. 2 Yahweh said to me, “This gate has been
sealed shut; it will not be opened. No man will
go through it, for Yahweh, the God of Israel, has
come through it, so it has been closed tightly.
3 The ruler of Israel will sit in it to eat food
before Yahweh. He will enter by way of the gate's
portico and go out the same way.”

Ezekiel 44:4

cxxx

Ezekiel 44:12

4 Then he brought me by way of the northern

gate to the front of the temple, and I looked, and
behold, the glory of Yahweh filled the house of
Yahweh, and I fell on my face. 5 Then Yahweh
said to me, “Son of man, set your heart and look
with your eyes and listen with your ears to all
that I am declaring to you, to all the statutes
of the house of Yahweh and all its regulations.
Think about the house's entrance and exits.
6 Then say to the rebellious ones, the house of
Israel, 'The Lord Yahweh says this: Let all of
your disgusting actions be enough for you, house
of Israel— 7 that you brought foreigners with
uncircumcised hearts and uncircumcised flesh to
be in my sanctuary, profaning my house, while
you were offering me food, fat and blood—you
have broken my covenant by all your disgusting
actions. 8 You have not carried out your duties
regarding my holy things, but you appointed
others to take up your duties, and you assigned
them to care for my holy place. 9 The Lord
Yahweh says this: No foreigner, uncircumcised
in heart and flesh, from any of those who live
among the people of Israel, may enter my holy
place. 10 Yet the Levites went far from me—
they wandered away from me, going after their
idols—but they will pay for their sin. 11 They
are servants in my sanctuary, watching the gates
of the house and serving in the house and they
slaughter the burnt offerings and the people's
sacrifices, and they will stand before the people
and serve them. 12 But because they performed
the sacrifices before their idols, they became

Ezekiel 44:13

cxxxi

Ezekiel 44:19

stumbling blocks for sin for the house of Israel.
Therefore I will lift up my hand to swear an
oath against them—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration—they will bear their punishment.
13 They will not come near me to act as my
priests or to approach any of my holy things,
the most holy things. Instead, they will bear
their reproach and their guilt for the disgusting
actions that they have done. 14 But I will place
them as keepers of the work in the house, for all
of its duties and everything that is done in it.
15 Then

the Levitical priests, those sons of
Zadok who fulfilled the duties of my sanctuary
when the people of Israel were wandering away
from me—they will come near me to worship
me. They will stand before me to offer me the
fat and the blood—this is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration. 16 They will come to my sanctuary;
they will approach my table to worship me
and to fulfill their duties to me. 17 So it will
be that when they come to the gates of the
inner courtyard, they will have to dress in linen
clothes, for they must not come in wool inside
the gates of the courtyard and its house. 18 There
should be linen turbans on their heads and
linen underclothes on their hips. They must not
dress in clothes that make them sweat. 19 When
they go out to the outer courtyard, to the outer
courtyard in order to go to the people, they
must take off the clothes they wore when they
served; they must take them off and lay them
down in a holy room, so they do not make
other people holy by contact with their special

Ezekiel 44:20

cxxxii

Ezekiel 44:30

clothing. 20 Also they must neither shave their
heads nor allow their hair to hang loosely, but
they must trim the hair of their heads. 21 No
priest may drink wine when he comes to the
inner court, 22 nor take a widow or a divorced
woman as a wife for himself, but only a virgin
from the line of the house of Israel or a widow
who was previously married to a priest. 23 For
they will teach my people the difference between
the holy and the profane; they will make them
know the unclean from the clean. 24 In a dispute
they will stand to judge with my decrees; they
must be just. They will keep my law and my
statutes in every feast, and they will celebrate
my holy Sabbaths. 25 They will not go to a dead
person so as to become unclean, unless it is their
father or mother, son or daughter, brother or a
sister who has not slept with a man; otherwise,
they will become unclean. 26 After a priest has
become unclean, they will count off a period of
seven days for him. 27 On the day he enters the
holy place, into the inner courtyard to serve in
the holy place, he must bring a sin offering for
himself—this is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.
28 This will be their inheritance: I am their
inheritance, and you must give them no property
in Israel; I will be their property! 29 They will
eat the food offerings, the sin offerings, the guilt
offerings, and everything devoted to Yahweh in
Israel, will be theirs. 30 The best of the firstfruits
of all things and every contribution, anything
from all of your contributions will belong to the
priests, and you will give the best of your meal

Ezekiel 44:31

cxxxiii

Ezekiel 45:7

offerings to the priests so that blessing may rest
on your house. 31 The priests will not eat any
carcass or animal torn by a beast, whether bird
or beast.

45

1 When you cast lots to divide up the land as

an inheritance, you must make an offering to
Yahweh; this offering will be a holy part of the
land, twenty-five thousand cubits in length, and
ten thousand cubits in width. It will be holy,
all its area round about. * 2 From this there
will be a five hundred cubits by five hundred
cubits square surrounding the holy place, with a
surrounding border fifty cubits in width. 3 From
this area you will measure a portion that is
twenty-five thousand cubits in length and ten
thousand in width; it will be the sanctuary, the
most holy place. 4 It will be a holy place in
the land for the priests who serve Yahweh, who
come near Yahweh to serve him. It will be a
place for their houses and a holy area for the
holy place. 5 So it will be twenty-five thousand
cubits in length and ten thousand in width, and
it will be for towns for the Levites who serve in
the house. 6 You will designate an area for the
city, five thousand cubits in width and twentyfive thousand in length, that will be next to the
area reserved for the holy place; this city will
belong to all the house of Israel. 7 The prince's
* 45:1 Instead of ten thousand , which the Hebrew text and some

modern versions have, some ancient copies and many modern
versions have twenty thousand .

Ezekiel 45:8

cxxxiv

Ezekiel 45:16

land will be on both sides of the area reserved for
the holy place and the city. It will be to their west
and to their east. The length will correspond
to the length of one of those portions, from the
west to the east. 8 This land will be property for
the prince in Israel. My princes will no longer
oppress my people; instead, they will give the
land to the house of Israel, for their tribes.
9 The Lord Yahweh says this: It is enough
for you, princes of Israel! Remove violence
and strife; do justice and righteousness! Quit
your evictions of my people!—this is the Lord
Yahweh's declaration. 10 You must have accurate
scales, accurate ephahs, and accurate baths!
11 The ephah and the bath will be the same
amount, so that a bath will be a tenth of a homer;
the ephah will be a tenth of a homer. Their
measure will be corresponding to the homer.
12 The shekel will be twenty gerahs; sixty shekels
will make a mina for you.
13 This is the contribution that you must
present: A sixth of an ephah for every homer
of wheat, and you will give a sixth of an ephah
for every homer of barley. 14 The regulation
offering of oil will be a tenth of a bath for every
cor (which is ten baths), or for every homer,
since a homer is also ten baths. 15 One sheep
or goat from the flock for every two hundred
animals from the watered regions of Israel will
be used for any burnt offering or peace offering
to make atonement for the people—this is the
Lord Yahweh's declaration. 16 All the people of
the land will give this contribution to the prince

Ezekiel 45:17

cxxxv

Ezekiel 45:24

in Israel. 17 It will be the prince's responsibility
to furnish animals for the burnt offerings, the
grain offerings, and the drink offerings at the
festivals and the new moon celebrations, and
on the Sabbath days—all the fixed festivals of
the house of Israel. He will provide for the sin
offerings, the grain offerings, the burnt offerings,
and the peace offerings for atonement on behalf
of the house of Israel.
18 The Lord Yahweh says this: In the first
month, on the first day of the month, you will
take an unblemished bull from the herd and
perform a sin offering for the sanctuary. 19 The
priest will take some of the blood of the sin
offering and place it on the doorposts of the
house and on the four corners of the border of
the altar, and on the doorposts of the gate to the
inner court. 20 You will do this on the seventh
of the month for each person's sin by accident
or ignorance; in this way you will atone for the
temple.
21 In

the first month on the fourteenth day
of the month, there will be for you a festival,
a seven-day festival. You will eat unleavened
bread. 22 On that day, the prince will prepare
for himself and for all the people of the land a
bull as a sin offering. 23 For the seven days of the
festival, the prince will prepare a burnt offering
for Yahweh: Seven bulls and seven unblemished
rams each day for seven days, and a male goat
each day as a sin offering. 24 Then the prince
will perform a food offering of an ephah for
each bull and an ephah for each ram with a

Ezekiel 45:25

cxxxvi

Ezekiel 46:7

hin of oil for each ephah. 25 In the seventh
month on the fifteenth day of the month, at
the festival, the prince will perform offerings on
these seven days: Sin offerings, burnt offerings,
food offerings, and offerings of oil.

46

1 The Lord Yahweh says this:

The gate of the
inner courtyard, facing east, will be shut for
the six days of work, but on the Sabbath it will
be opened, and on the day of the new moon
it will be opened. 2 The prince will enter the
outer courtyard by the way of the gate and its
portico from outside, and he will stand before
the doorposts of the inner gate while the priests
perform his burnt offering and peace offering.
Then he will worship at the threshold of the
inner gate and go out, but the gate will not be
shut until evening. 3 The people of the land will
also worship before Yahweh at the entrance to
this gate on the Sabbaths and new moons. 4 The
burnt offering that the prince offers to Yahweh
on the Sabbath day will be six unblemished
lambs and an unblemished ram. 5 The grain
offering with the ram will be an ephah, and the
grain offering with the lambs will be what he
wishes to give, and a hin of oil with each ephah
of grain.
6 On the day of the new moon he must offer
an unblemished bull from a herd, six lambs, and
an unblemished ram. 7 He must make a grain
offering of an ephah for the bull and an ephah
for the ram, and what he wishes to give for the

Ezekiel 46:8

cxxxvii

Ezekiel 46:15

lambs, and a hin of oil for every ephah of grain.
8 When the prince enters by the way of the gate
and its portico, he must leave by the same way.
9 But when the people of the land come before

Yahweh at the appointed festivals, anyone entering through the north gate to worship must leave
through the south gate; and anyone entering
through the south gate must leave through the
north gate. No one may turn back to the gate
through which he entered, for he must go out
straight ahead. 10 The prince must be in their
midst; when they go in, he must go in, and when
they leave, he must leave. 11 At the festivals, the
grain offering must be an ephah of grain for the
bull and an ephah for the ram, and whatever
he wishes to give with the lambs, and a hin of
oil for every ephah. 12 When the prince gives
a freewill offering, either a burnt offering or a
peace offering to Yahweh, the gate facing east
will be opened for him. He will offer his burnt
offering offering or his peace offering as he does
it on the Sabbath day. Then he must go out, and
after he has gone out the gate will be shut.
13 In addition, you will give an unblemished

lamb one year old as a burnt offering to Yahweh
daily; you will do this morning after morning.
14 You will give a grain offering with it morning
after morning, a sixth of an ephah and a third
of a hin of oil to moisten the flour of the grain
offering for Yahweh, according to a permanent
statute. 15 They will prepare the lamb, the grain
offering, and the oil morning after morning, a

Ezekiel 46:16

cxxxviii

Ezekiel 46:22

permanent burnt offering.
16 The Lord Yahweh says this:

If the prince
gives a gift to any of his sons, it is his inheritance.
It will be the property of his sons, it is an
inheritance. 17 But if he gives a gift from his
inheritance to one of his servants, then it will
be that servant's until the year of liberty, and
then it will return to the prince. His inheritance
will certainly be for his sons. 18 The prince will
not take the people's inheritance away from their
own property; he must provide for his sons from
his own property so that my people will not be
scattered, each man from his own property.'”
Next the man brought me through the
entrance at the gate to the holy rooms for the
priests, which faced north and behold! There
was a place toward the west. 20 He said to me,
“This is the place where the priests must boil
the guilt offering and the sin offering and where
they must bake the grain offering. They must not
bring the offerings into the outer courtyard, for
then the people would be consecrated.” 21 Then
he brought me to the outer courtyard and he led
me past the four corners of that courtyard, and
I saw that in at every corner of the courtyard
there was a another court. 22 In the four corners
of the outer courtyard there were four small
courtyards, forty cubits in length and thirty in
width. There the same dimensions for all four of
19

Ezekiel 46:23

cxxxix

Ezekiel 47:5

the courtyards. * 23 There was a row made of
stone all around the four of them, and cooking
hearths were under the stone row. 24 The man
said to me, “These are the places where the
temple servants will boil the people's sacrifices.”

47

1 Then the man took me back to the entrance

to the temple, and there was water flowing out
from under the temple threshold of the house
toward the east—for the front of the temple
faced east—and the water was flowing down the
south side of the temple, to the right of the altar.
2 So he brought me out through the northern gate
and led around to the gate facing east, and there
the water was flowing from this gate on its south
side.
3 As the man was going toward the east, there
was a measuring line in his hand; he measured
off one thousand cubits and brought me through
the water to ankle-deep water. 4 Then he measured one thousand cubits again and brought me
through the water to knee-deep water; and he
measured another thousand cubits and brought
me to hip-deep water. 5 Next he measured off
another thousand cubits, but it was a river that
I could not cross through because the water had
risen and was deep enough to swim in—it was a
river that could not be crossed.
* 46:22 The Hebrew word translated here as small is unclear.
It is translated in this way by some ancient and some modern
versions. However, other modern versions translate it differently.

Ezekiel 47:6

cxl

Ezekiel 47:15

6 The man said to me, “Son of man, do you see

this?” and he brought me out and had me walk
back along the riverbank. 7 As I walked back,
there the riverbank had many trees on this side
and also the other side. 8 The man said to me,
“This water is going out to the eastern territory
and down to the Arabah; this water flows into
the Salt Sea and will make it fresh. 9 It will be that
every living creature that swarms will live where
the water goes; there will be many fish, for these
waters flow there. It will make the salt water
fresh. Everything will live wherever the river
goes. 10 Then it will happen that fishermen of En
Gedi will stand by the water, and there will be
a place to dry out the fishing nets by En Eglaim.
There will be many kinds of fish in the Salt Sea,
like the fish in the Great Sea for their abundance.
11 But the Salt Sea's swamps and marshes will
not be made fresh; they will be for providing
salt. 12 Beside this river on its banks, on both
sides, all kinds of trees will grow that bear food.
Their leaves will not wither and their fruit will
never fail to grow. Each month the trees will
bear fruit, because the water from the sanctuary
flows to them. Their fruit will be for food, and
their leaves will be for healing.
13 The Lord Yahweh says this: This will be the

way that you divide the land up for the twelve
tribes of Israel: Joseph will have two portions.
14 You are to divide equally what I lifted up my
hand and swore to give to your fathers. This land
will come to you as an inheritance.
15 This will be the boundary of the land on

Ezekiel 47:16

cxli

Ezekiel 47:23

the north side from the Great Sea by way of
Hethlon, and then to Zedad. * 16 Then the
boundary will go to Berothah, to Sibraim, which
is between Damascus and Hamath, and then to
Hazer Hattikon, which is beside the boundary
of Hauran. 17 So the boundary will go from the
sea to Hazar Enan on the border with Damascus
and Hamath to the north. This will be the
north side. 18 On the east side the boundary
will run between Hauran and Damascus, along
the Jordan River between Gilead and the land
of Israel. You will measure from the border to
the eastern sea. This will be the eastern border.
† 19 Then on the south side the boundary will
run from Tamar as far as the waters of Meribah
Kadesh, then along the brook of Egypt to the
Great Sea. This will be the boundary on the
south side. 20 Then the boundary on the west
side will be the Great Sea to a point opposite Lebo
Hamath. This will be the west side.
21 In this way you will divide this land for
yourselves, for the tribes of Israel. 22 So you
will distribute the inheritances for yourselves
and for the foreigners in your midst, those who
have given birth to children in your midst and
who are, with you, like the native born people of
Israel. You will cast lots for inheritances among
the tribes of Israel. 23 Then it will happen that the
* 47:15

The Hebrew text reads by way of Hethlon, and then
to Zedad , but some modern versions imitate 48:1 and add Lebo
† 47:18 The Hebrew text reads You will measure
Hamath .
from the border to the eastern sea . However, some ancient and
modern versions read to the eastern sea as far as Tamar .

Ezekiel 48:1

cxlii

Ezekiel 48:10

foreigner will be with the tribe among whom he
is living. You must give him an inheritance—this
is the Lord Yahweh's declaration.”
1 These

48

are the names of the tribes. The
tribe of Dan will receive one portion of land; its
boundary will run along the northern boundary
of Israel by way of Hethlon and Lebo Hamath.
Its boundary will go on to Hazar Enan and along
the border with Damascus to the north and then
on to Hamath. Dan's boundary will go from east
all the way to the Great Sea. 2 Adjoining the
border of Dan, from the east side to the west,
Asher will have one portion. 3 Adjoining the
border of Asher from the east side to the west,
Naphtali will have one portion. 4 Adjoining the
border of Naphtali from the east side to the west,
Manasseh will have one portion. 5 Adjoining the
border of Manasseh from the east side to the
west, Ephraim will have one portion. 6 Adjoining
the border of Ephraim from the east side to the
west, Reuben will have one portion. 7 Adjoining
the border of Reuben from the east side to the
west, Judah will have one portion.
8 The offering of land that you will make will
be along the border with Judah and extend from
the east side to the west side; it will be twentyfive thousand cubits in width. Its length will
correspond to one tribe's portion from the east
side to the west side, and the temple will be in
the middle of it. 9 This land that you will offer up
to Yahweh will be twenty-five thousand cubits in
length and ten thousand cubits in width. 10 These

Ezekiel 48:11

cxliii

Ezekiel 48:17

will be the assignments of this holy portion of
land: The priests will have land assigned to them
measuring twenty-five thousand cubits in length
on the north side; ten thousand cubits in width
on the west side; ten thousand cubits in width on
the east side; and twenty-five thousand cubits in
length on the south side, with the holy place of
Yahweh in the middle of it. 11 This will be for the
consecration of the priests of the line of Zadok,
who have served me faithfully and who did not
go astray when the people of Israel went astray,
as the Levites did. 12 The offering for them will
be a portion of this most holy land, extending to
the border of the Levites.
13 The Levites' land along the border with the
priests' land will be twenty-five thousand cubits
in length and ten thousand cubits in width. The
entire length of the two tracts of land will be
twenty-five thousand cubits in length and twenty
thousand cubits in width. 14 They must not sell
it or exchange it; none of this firstfruits of the
land of Israel must ever be separated from these
tracts, for it all is holy to Yahweh.
15 The remaining land, five thousand cubits in
width and twenty-five thousand cubits in length,
will be for the collective use of the city, the
houses, and the pastureland; the city will be in its
midst. 16 These will be the city's measurements:
The north side will be 4,500 cubits in length; the
south side will be 4,500 cubits in length; the east
side will be 4,500 cubits in length; and the west
side will be 4,500 cubits in length. 17 There will
be pasture for the city toward the north, 250

Ezekiel 48:18

cxliv

Ezekiel 48:24

cubits deep; to the south, 250 cubits deep; to
the east, 250 cubits deep, and to the west, 250
cubits deep. 18 The remaining area of the holy
offering will stretch for ten thousand cubits to
the east and ten thousand cubits to the west. It
will stretch along the border of the holy offering,
and its produce will be food for those working
in the city. 19 The people who work in the
city, people belong to all the tribes of Israel,
will farm that land. 20 All the land offering will
measure twenty-five thousand cubits by twentyfive thousand cubits. In this way you will make
the holy offering of land, together with the land
for the city.
21 The rest of the land on either side of the holy
offering and the city area will be for the prince.
The prince's tract of land to the east will extend
for twenty-five thousand cubits from boundary
of the holy offering to the eastern border—and
his tract to the west will extend for twenty-five
thousand cubits to the western border. In the
middle will be the holy offering, and the holy
place of the temple will be in its midst. 22 The
land extending from the property of the Levites
and the area of the city in its midst will be for
for the prince; it will be between the border of
Judah and the border of Benjamin—this land will
be for the prince.
23 As for the remaining tribes, their portions
will also run from the eastern side to the
west side. Benjamin will receive one portion.
24 Adjoining the border of Benjamin from the
east side to the west, Simeon will have one

Ezekiel 48:25

cxlv

Ezekiel 48:35

portion. 25 Adjoining the border of Simeon from
the east side to the west, Issachar will have one
portion. 26 Adjoining the border of Issachar from
the east side to the west, Zebulun will have one
portion. 27 To the south of Zebulun's boundary,
running from the east side to the west side, will
be the land of Gad—one portion. 28 The southern
boundary of Gad will extend from Tamar to the
waters of Meribah Kadesh, and farther to the
brook of Egypt, and then to the Great Sea. 29 This
is the land for which you will cast lots; it will
be the inheritance of the tribes of Israel. These
will be their portions. This is the Lord Yahweh's
declaration.
30 These will be the exits from the city: On the
north side, which will measure 4,500 cubits in
length, 31 will be three gates, named for tribes of
Israel: one gate for Reuben, one gate for Judah,
and one gate for Levi. 32 On the east side, which
will measure 4,500 cubits in length, will be three
gates: one gate for Joseph, one gate for Benjamin,
and one gate for Dan. 33 On the south side, which
is 4,500 cubits in length, will be three gates: one
gate for Simeon, one gate for Issachar, and one
gate for Zebulun. 34 On the west side, which will
measure 4,500 cubits, will be three gates: one
gate for Gad, one gate for Asher, and one gate
for Naphtali. 35 The distance around the city will
be eighteen thousand cubits; from that day on,
the city's name will be “Yahweh Is There.”

cxlvi

Unlocked Literal Bible

The Holy Bible in English, Unlocked Literal Bible
translation
copyright © 2017 Door43 World Missions Community
Language: English
Translation by: Door43 World Missions Community
Contributor: 'Alrick G. Headley, M.Div., Th.M.', 'Adam W. Nagelvoort,
M.Div. Academic Ministries, Columbia International University', 'Dave
Statezni, BA Orig langs., M.Div. Fuller Theological Seminary', 'Bram van
den Heuvel, M.A.', 'C. Harry Harriss, M.Div.', 'David Trombold, M. Div.',
'Elizabeth Oakes, BA in Religious Studies, Linguistics', 'George "Drew"
Curley, M.Div., PhD, Professor of Biblical Languages', Hendrik "Henry" de
Vries, 'Henry Whitney, BA Linguistics', 'Jesse Griffin, BA Biblical Studies,
MA Biblical Languages', 'James N. Pohlig, M.Div., MA in Linguistics,
D. Litt. in Biblical Languages', 'Larry T Brooks, M.Div., Assemblies of
God Theological Seminary', 'Larry Sallee, D.Min.', 'Paul M Fahnestock,
M.Div. Reformed Theological Seminary, D. Min. Pittsburgh Theological
Seminary', 'Perry Oakes, PhD in Old Testament, MA in Linguistics', 'Peter
Smircich, BA Philosophy', 'Susan Quigley, MA in Linguistics', 'Thomas
Warren, M.Div., Trinity Evangelical Divinity School, D.Min, Reformed
Theological Seminary', 'Timothy Neu, Ph.D. Biblical Studies', 'Ward Pyles,
M.Div., Western Baptist Theological Seminary', David Trombold, Dean
Ropp, Gene Mullen, James Vigen, Leonard Smith, Nicholas Alsop, Michael
Francis
This is an open-licensed update of the ASV, intended to provide a 'formcentric' understanding of the Bible. It increases the translator's understanding of the lexical and grammatical composition of the underlying
text by adhering closely to the word order and structure of the originals.
This translation is made available to you under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Share-Alike license 4.0.
You have permission to share and redistribute this Bible translation in
any format and to make reasonable revisions and adaptations of this
translation, provided that:
You include the above copyright and source information.
If you make any changes to the text, you must indicate that you did
so in a way that makes it clear that the original licensor is not
necessarily endorsing your changes.

cxlvii
If you redistribute this text, you must distribute your contributions
under the same license as the original.
Pictures included with Scriptures and other documents on this site are
licensed just for use with those Scriptures and documents. For other uses,
please contact the respective copyright owners.
Note that in addition to the rules above, revising and adapting God's Word
involves a great responsibility to be true to God's Word. See Revelation
22:18-19.
2020-12-04
PDF generated using Haiola and XeLaTeX on 3 Mar 2023 from source files
dated 22 Nov 2019
d2521e10-6da3-5d98-a991-da7d3515afd5

