John 1:1

i

John 1:17

John
1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God. 2 This one
was in the beginning with God. 3 All things were

made through him, and without him there was
not one thing made that has been made. 4 In him
was life, and the life was the light of men. 5 The
light shines in the darkness, and the darkness
did not overcome it. 6 There was a man who
was sent from God, whose name was John. 7 He
came as a witness to testify about the light, that
all might believe through him. 8 John was not
the light, but came that he might testify about
the light. 9 The true light, which gives light to
all men, was coming into the world. 10 He was in
the world, and the world was made through him,
and the world did not know him. 11 He came to
his own, and his own did not receive him. 12 But
to as many as received him, who believed in his
name, he gave the right to become children of
God. 13 These were not born of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God. 14 The Word became flesh and lived among
us. We have seen his glory, glory as of the one
and only who came from the Father, full of grace
and truth. 15 John testified about him and cried
out, saying, “This was the one of whom I said,
'He who comes after me is greater than I am, for
he was before me.'” 16 For from his fullness we
have all received grace after grace. 17 For the law

John 1:18

ii

John 1:31

was given through Moses. Grace and truth came
through Jesus Christ. 18 No one has seen God at
any time. The one and only God, who is at the
side of the Father, he has made him known.
19 This is the testimony of John when the Jews
sent priests and Levites to him from Jerusalem
to ask him, “Who are you?” 20 He confessed—
he did not deny, but confessed—”I am not the
Christ.” 21 So they asked him, “What are you
then? Are you Elijah?” He said, “I am not.” They
said, “Are you the prophet?” He answered, “No.”
22 Then they said to him, “Who are you, so that
we may give an answer to those who sent us?
What do you say about yourself?” 23 He said,
“I am a voice, crying in the wilderness:
'Make the way of the Lord straight,'
just as Isaiah the prophet said.” 24 Now some
from the Pharisees were sent, 25 and they asked
him and said to him, “Why do you baptize
then if you are not the Christ nor Elijah nor
the prophet?” 26 John answered them, saying,
“I baptize with water. But among you stands
someone you do not know. 27 He is the one who
comes after me, the strap of whose sandal I am
not worthy to untie.” 28 These things were done
in Bethany on the other side of the Jordan, where
John was baptizing. 29 The next day John saw
Jesus coming to him and said, “Look, there is
the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the
world! 30 This is the one of whom I said, 'The
one who comes after me is more than me, for
he was before me.' 31 I did not know him, but
it was so that he could be revealed to Israel that

John 1:32

iii

John 1:45

I came baptizing with water.” 32 John testified,
saying, “I saw the Spirit descending like a dove
from heaven, and it stayed upon him. 33 I did not
recognize him, but he who sent me to baptize in
water said to me, 'Upon whom you shall see the
Spirit descending and remaining on him, he is
the one baptizing in the Holy Spirit.' 34 I have
both seen and testified that this is the Son of
God.”
35 Again, the next day, as John was standing
with two of his disciples, 36 they saw Jesus
walking by, and John said, “Look, the Lamb of
God!” 37 His two disciples heard him say this
and they followed Jesus. 38 Then Jesus turned
and saw them following him and said to them,
“What do you want?” They replied, “Rabbi
(which translated means teacher), where are you
staying?” 39 He said to them, “Come and see.”
Then they came and saw where he was staying;
they stayed with him that day, for it was about
the tenth hour. 40 One of the two who heard John
speak and then followed Jesus was Andrew, the
brother of Simon Peter. 41 He first found his own
brother Simon and said to him, “We have found
the Messiah” (which translated is: Christ). 42 He
brought him to Jesus, and Jesus looked at him
and said, “You are Simon son of John. You will
be called Cephas” (which is translated Peter).
43 The next day, when Jesus wanted to leave
to go to Galilee, he found Philip and said to
him, “Follow me.” 44 Now Philip was from
Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. 45 Philip
found Nathaniel and said to him, “He of whom

John 1:46

iv

John 2:8

Moses wrote in the law, and the prophets, we
have found him: Jesus son of Joseph, from
Nazareth.” 46 Nathaniel said to him, “Can any
good thing come out of Nazareth?” Philip said
to him, “Come and see.” 47 Jesus saw Nathaniel
coming to him and said about him, “See, a true
Israelite, in whom is no deceit!” 48 Nathaniel
said to him, “How do you know me?” Jesus
answered and said to him, “Before Philip called
you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw
you.” 49 Nathaniel replied, “Rabbi, you are the
Son of God! You are the King of Israel!” 50 Jesus
replied and said to him, “Because I said to you, 'I
saw you underneath the fig tree,' do you believe?
You will see greater things than this.” 51 Then
he said, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you will
see the heavens opened, and the angels of God
ascending and descending upon the Son of Man.”
1 Three

2

days later, there was a wedding in
Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was
there. 2 Jesus and his disciples were invited to the
wedding. 3 When the wine ran out, the mother of
Jesus said to him, “They have no wine.” 4 Jesus
said to her, “Woman, why do you come to me?
My time has not yet come.” 5 His mother said
to the servants, “Whatever he says to you, do
it.” 6 Now there were six stone water pots there
used for the Jewish ceremonial washing, each
containing two to three metretes. 7 Jesus said
to them, “Fill the water pots with water.” So
they filled them up to the brim. 8 Then he told

John 2:9

v

John 2:20

the servants, “Take some out now and take it
to the head waiter.” So they did. 9 The head
waiter tasted the water that had become wine,
but he did not know where it came from (but
the servants who had drawn the water knew).
Then he called the bridegroom 10 and said to
him, “Every man serves the good wine first and
then the cheaper wine when they are drunk. But
you have kept the good wine until now.” 11 This
first sign Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and he
revealed his glory, and his disciples believed in
him. 12 After this Jesus, his mother, his brothers,
and his disciples went down to Capernaum and
they stayed there for a few days.
13 Now the Passover of the Jews was near,
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 14 He found
sellers of oxen and sheep and pigeons, and the
money changers were sitting there. 15 So he
made a whip of cords and drove all of them out
from the temple, including both the sheep and
the oxen. He scattered the coins of the money
changers and overthrew their tables. 16 To the
pigeon sellers he said, “Take these things away
from here. Stop making the house of my Father
a marketplace.” 17 His disciples remembered
that it was written, “Zeal for your house will
consume me.” 18 Then the Jewish authorities
responded and said to him, “What sign will you
show us, since you are doing these things?”
19 Jesus replied, “Destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up.” 20 Then the Jewish
authorities said, “This temple was built in fortysix years, and you will raise it up in three days?”

John 2:21

vi

John 3:8

21 However, he was speaking about the temple of
his body. 22 After he was raised from the dead,

his disciples remembered that he said this, and
they believed the scripture and this statement
that Jesus had spoken.
23 Now when he was in Jerusalem at the
Passover festival, many believed in his name
when they saw the signs that he did. 24 But Jesus
did not trust in them because he knew them all,
25 because he did not need anyone to testify to
him about man, for he knew what was in man.

3

1 Now there was a Pharisee whose name was
Nicodemus, a Jewish leader. 2 This man came

to Jesus at night and said to him, “Rabbi, we
know that you are a teacher that came from
God, for no one can do these signs that you do
unless God is with him.” 3 Jesus replied to him,
“Truly, truly, unless someone is born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God.” 4 Nicodemus
said to him, “How can a man be born when he
is old? He cannot enter a second time into his
mother's womb and be born, can he?” 5 Jesus
replied, “Truly, truly, unless someone is born of
water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. 6 That which is born of the flesh
is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is
spirit. 7 Do not be amazed that I said to you,
'You must be born again.' 8 The wind blows
wherever it wishes; you hear its sound, but you
do not know where it comes from or where it is
going. So is everyone who is born of the Spirit.”

John 3:9

vii

John 3:22

9 Nicodemus replied and said to him, “How can
these things be?” 10 Jesus answered and said to

him, “Are you a teacher of Israel, and yet you do
not understand these things? 11 Truly, truly, I say
to you, we speak what we know, and we testify
about what we have seen. Yet you do not accept
our testimony. 12 If I told you about earthly
things and you do not believe, how will you
believe if I tell you about heavenly things? 13 No
one has ascended into heaven except he who
descended from heaven—the Son of Man. 14 Just
as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness,
so must the Son of Man be lifted up, 15 so that all
who believe in him may have eternal life.
16 For God so loved the world, that he gave
his one and only Son, that whoever believes in
him will not perish but have eternal life. 17 For
God did not send the Son into the world in
order to condemn the world, but in order to
save the world through him. 18 He who believes
in him is not condemned, but he who does not
believe is already condemned because he has not
believed in the name of the one and only Son of
God. 19 This is the reason for the judgment: The
light has come into the world, and men loved
the darkness rather than the light because their
deeds were evil. 20 For everyone who does evil
hates the light, and does not come to the light, so
that his deeds will not be exposed. 21 However,
he who practices the truth comes to the light so
that it may be plainly seen that his deeds have
been done in God.”
22 After this, Jesus and his disciples went into

John 3:23

viii

John 3:36

the land of Judea. There he spent some time
with them and baptized. 23 Now John was also
baptizing in Aenon near to Salim because there
was much water there. People were coming to
him and were being baptized, 24 for John had not
yet been thrown in prison. 25 Then there arose
a dispute between some of John's disciples and
a Jew about ceremonial washing. 26 They went
to John and said to him, “Rabbi, the one who
was with you on the other side of the Jordan
River, about whom you have testified, look, he is
baptizing, and they are all going to him.” 27 John
replied, “A man cannot receive anything unless
it has been given to him from heaven. 28 You
yourselves can testify that I said, 'I am not the
Christ,' but instead, 'I have been sent before
him.' 29 The bride belongs to the bridegroom.
Now the friend of the bridegroom, who stands
and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the
voice of the bridegroom. This, then, is my joy
made complete. 30 He must increase, but I must
decrease.
31 He who comes from above is above all.

He
who is from the earth is from the earth and
speaks about the earth. He who comes from
heaven is above all. 32 He testifies about what
he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his
testimony. 33 He who has received his testimony
has confirmed that God is true. 34 For the one
whom God has sent speaks the words of God. For
he does not give the Spirit by measure. 35 The
Father loves the Son and has given all things
into his hand. 36 He who believes in the Son has

John 4:1

ix

John 4:13

eternal life, but the one who disobeys the Son
will not see life, but the wrath of God stays on
him.”

4

1 Now when Jesus knew that the Pharisees had

heard that he was making and baptizing more
disciples than John 2 (although Jesus himself was
not baptizing, but his disciples were), 3 he left
Judea and went back again to Galilee. 4 But it
was necessary for him to go through Samaria.
5 So he came to a town of Samaria, called Sychar,
near the piece of land that Jacob had given to his
son Joseph. 6 The well of Jacob was there. Jesus
was tired from his journey and sat by the well. It
was about the sixth hour. 7 A Samaritan woman
came to draw water, and Jesus said to her, “Give
me some water to drink.” 8 For his disciples had
gone away into the town to buy food. 9 Then
the Samaritan woman said to him, “How is it
that you, being a Jew, are asking me, being a
Samaritan woman, for something to drink?” For
Jews have no dealings with Samaritans. 10 Jesus
answered and said to her, “If you had known
the gift of God, and who it is that is saying to
you, 'Give me a drink,' you would have asked
him, and he would have given you living water.”
11 The woman said to him, “Sir, you do not have a
bucket and the well is deep. Where then do you
have the living water? 12 You are not greater,
are you, than our father Jacob, who gave us
the well and drank from it himself, as did his
sons and his cattle?” 13 Jesus replied and said

John 4:14

x

John 4:26

to her, “Everyone who drinks from this water
will be thirsty again, 14 but whoever drinks from
the water that I will give him will never be
thirsty again. Instead, the water that I will give
him will become a fountain of water in him,
springing up to eternal life.” 15 The woman said
to him, “Sir, give me this water so that I may
not become thirsty and not have to come here
to draw water.” 16 Jesus said to her, “Go, call
your husband, and come back here.” 17 The
woman answered and said to him, “I do not
have a husband.” Jesus replied, “You are right
in saying, 'I have no husband,' 18 for you have
had five husbands, and the one you now have is
not your husband. What you have said is true.”
19 The woman said to him, “Sir, I see that you
are a prophet. 20 Our fathers worshiped on this
mountain, but you say that Jerusalem is the place
where people have to worship.” 21 Jesus said to
her, “Believe me, woman, that an hour is coming
when you will worship the Father neither on
this mountain nor in Jerusalem. 22 You worship
what you do not know. We worship what we
know, for salvation is from the Jews. 23 However,
the hour is coming, and is now here, when true
worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and
truth, for the Father is seeking such people to be
his worshipers. 24 God is Spirit, and the people
who worship him must worship in spirit and
truth.” 25 The woman said to him, “I know that
the Messiah is coming (the one called Christ).
When he comes, he will explain everything to
us.” 26 Jesus said to her, “I am he, the one

John 4:27

xi

John 4:41

speaking to you.”
27 At that moment his disciples returned. Now
they were wondering why he was speaking with
a woman, but no one said, “What do you want?”
or “Why are you speaking with her?” 28 So the
woman left her water pot, went back to the town,
and said to the people, 29 “Come, see a man who
told me everything that I have ever done. This
could not be the Christ, could it?” 30 They left the
town and came to him. 31 In the meantime, the
disciples were urging him, saying, “Rabbi, eat.”
32 But he said to them, “I have food to eat that
you do not know about.” 33 So the disciples said
to each other, “No one has brought him anything
to eat, have they?” 34 Jesus said to them, “My
food is to do the will of him who sent me and to
complete his work. 35 Do you not say, 'There are
four more months and then the harvest comes'?
I am saying to you, look up and see the fields,
for they are already ripe for harvest! 36 He who
is harvesting receives wages and gathers fruit
for everlasting life, so that he who sows and he
who harvests may rejoice together. 37 For in this
the saying, 'One sows, and another harvests,' is
true. 38 I sent you to harvest what you have not
worked for. Others have worked, and you have
entered into their labor.”
39 Many of the Samaritans in that city believed
in him because of the report of the woman who
was testifying, “He told me everything that I have
done.” 40 So when the Samaritans came to him,
they asked him to stay with them, and he stayed
there two days. 41 Many more believed because

John 4:42

xii

John 4:54

of his word. 42 They said to the woman, “We no
longer believe because of what you said, for we
ourselves have heard, and we know that this one
is indeed the savior of the world.”
43 After those two days, he departed from there
for Galilee. 44 For Jesus himself declared that

a prophet has no honor in his own country.
45 When he came into Galilee, the Galileans
welcomed him. They had seen all the things that
he had done in Jerusalem at the festival, for they
had also gone to the festival.
46 Now he came again to Cana in Galilee, where

he had made the water wine. There was a
certain royal official whose son in Capernaum
was ill. 47 When he heard that Jesus had come
from Judea to Galilee, he went to Jesus and asked
him to come down and heal his son, who was
about to die. 48 Jesus then said to him, “Unless
you see signs and wonders, you will not believe.”
49 The official said to him, “Sir, come down
before my child dies.” 50 Jesus said to him, “Go.
Your son lives.” The man believed the word that
Jesus spoke to him, and he went away. 51 While
he was going down, his servants met him, saying
that his son was living. 52 So he asked them the
hour when he began to improve. They replied to
him, “Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left
him.” 53 Then the father realized that it was at
that hour that Jesus had said to him, “Your son
lives.” So he himself and his whole household
believed. 54 This was the second sign that Jesus
did when he came out of Judea to Galilee.

John 5:1

xiii

John 5:13

5

1 After this there was a Jewish festival, and
Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 2 Now in Jerusalem

by the sheep gate, there is a pool, which in
Hebrew is called Bethesda, and it has five roofed
porches. 3 A large number of people who were
sick, blind, lame, or paralyzed were lying there.
* 4 † 5 A certain man was there who had been
sick for thirty-eight years. 6 When Jesus saw him
lying there, and after he realized that he had
been there a long time, he said to him, “Do you
want to be healthy?” 7 The sick man replied,
“Sir, I do not have anyone to put me into the
pool when the water is stirred up. When I come,
another steps down before me.” 8 Jesus said
to him, “Get up, take up your bed, and walk.”
9 Immediately the man was healed, and he took
up his bed and walked.
Now that day was a Sabbath. 10 So the Jews
said to him who was healed, “It is the Sabbath
and you are not permitted to carry your mat.”
11 He replied, “He who made me healthy said to
me, 'Pick up your mat and walk.'” 12 They asked
him, “Who is the man that said to you, 'Pick it up
and walk'?” 13 However, the one who was healed
did not know who it was because Jesus had gone
away secretly, for there was a crowd in the place.
* 5:3 The best ancient copies omit the phrase, waiting for the
† 5:4 The best ancient copies omit
moving of the water .
vs. 4, For an angel of the Lord went down and stirred up the
water at certain times and whoever stepped in while the water
was stirring was healed from whatever disease he suffered from
.

John 5:14

xiv

John 5:25

14 Afterward, Jesus found him in the temple and

said to him, “See, you have become healthy! Do
not sin anymore, so that something worse will
not happen to you.” 15 The man went away
and reported to the Jews that it was Jesus who
had made him healthy. 16 Now because of these
things the Jews persecuted Jesus, because he did
these things on the Sabbath. 17 Jesus replied to
them, “My Father is working even now, and I,
too, am working.” 18 Because of this, the Jews
sought even more to kill him because he not only
broke the Sabbath, but also called God his own
Father, making himself equal to God.
19 Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, the Son

can do nothing of himself, except only what he
sees the Father doing, for whatever the Father
is doing, the Son does these things also. 20 For
the Father loves the Son and he shows him
everything that he himself does, and he will
show him greater things than these so that you
will be amazed. 21 For as the Father raises the
dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives
life to whomever he wishes. 22 For the Father
judges no one, but he has given all judgment to
the Son 23 so that everyone will honor the Son
just as they honor the Father. The one who does
not honor the Son does not honor the Father who
sent him. 24 Truly, truly, he who hears my word
and believes him who sent me has eternal life
and will not be condemned, but he has passed
from death to life. 25 Truly, truly, I tell you the
time is coming, and is now, when the dead will
hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who

John 5:26

xv

John 5:39

hear will live. 26 For just as the Father has life in
himself, so he has also given to the Son so that
he has life in himself, 27 and the Father has given
the Son authority to carry out judgment because
he is the Son of Man. 28 Do not be amazed at this,
for there is a time coming in which everyone
who is in the tombs will hear his voice 29 and
will come out. Those who have done good to
the resurrection of life, and those who have done
evil to the resurrection of judgment.
30 I can do nothing from myself.

As I hear,
I judge, and my judgment is righteous because
I am not seeking my own will but the will of
him who sent me. 31 If I should testify about
myself, my testimony would not be true. 32 There
is another who testifies about me, and I know
that the testimony that he gives about me is true.
33 You have sent to John, and he has testified
the truth. 34 But the testimony that I receive is
not from man. I say these things that you might
be saved. 35 John was a lamp that was burning
and shining, and you were willing to rejoice in
his light for a while. 36 Yet the testimony that I
have is greater than that of John, for the works
that the Father has given me to accomplish, the
very works that I do, testify about me that the
Father has sent me. 37 The Father who sent me
has himself testified about me. You have neither
heard his voice nor seen his form at any time.
38 You do not have his word remaining in you,
for you are not believing in the one whom he
has sent. 39 You search the scriptures because
you think that in them you have eternal life, and

John 5:40

xvi

John 6:8

these same scriptures testify about me, 40 and
you are not willing to come to me so that you may
have life. 41 I do not receive praise from men,
42 but I know that you do not have the love of
God in yourselves. 43 I have come in my Father's
name, and you do not receive me. If another
should come in his own name, you would receive
him. 44 How can you believe, you who accept
praise from one another but are not seeking the
praise that comes from the only God? 45 Do not
think that I myself will accuse you before the
Father. The one who accuses you is Moses, in
whom you have put your hope. 46 If you believed
Moses, you would believe me, because he wrote
about me. 47 If you do not believe his writings,
how are you going to believe my words?”
1 After these things,

6

Jesus went away to the
other side of the Sea of Galilee, also called the
Sea of Tiberias. 2 A great crowd was following
him because they saw the signs that he was
doing on those who were sick. 3 Jesus went
up the mountain and there he sat down with
his disciples. 4 (Now the Passover, the Jewish
festival, was near.) 5 When Jesus looked up and
saw a great crowd coming to him, he said to
Philip, “Where are we going to buy bread so that
these may eat?” 6 (But Jesus said this to test
Philip, for he himself knew what he was going
to do.) 7 Philip answered him, “Two hundred
denarii worth of bread would not be sufficient
for each one to have even a little.” 8 One of the

John 6:9

xvii

John 6:21

disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter,
said to Jesus, 9 “There is a boy here who has five
bread loaves of barley and two fish, but what
are these among so many?” 10 Jesus said, “Make
the people sit down.” (Now there was a lot of
grass in the place.) So the men sat down, about
five thousand in number. 11 Then Jesus took the
loaves and after giving thanks, he gave it to those
who were sitting. He did the same with the fish,
as much as they wanted. 12 When the people
were filled, he said to his disciples, “Gather up
the broken pieces which remain, so that nothing
will be lost.” 13 So they gathered them up and
filled twelve baskets with broken pieces from the
five barley loaves left over by those who had
eaten. 14 Then, when the people saw this sign
that he did, they said, “This truly is the prophet
who is to come into the world.” 15 When Jesus
realized that they were about to come and seize
him by force to make him king, he withdrew
again up the mountain by himself.
16 When it became evening, his disciples went
down to the sea. 17 They got into a boat, and

were going over the sea to Capernaum. It was
dark by this time, and Jesus had not yet come
to them. 18 A strong wind was blowing, and the
sea was getting rough. 19 When they had rowed
about twenty-five or thirty stadia, they saw Jesus
walking on the sea and coming near the boat,
and they were afraid. 20 But he said to them, “It
is I! Do not be afraid.” 21 Then they were willing
to receive him into the boat, and immediately the

John 6:22

xviii

John 6:32

boat reached the land where they were going.
22 The

next day, the crowd that had been
standing on the other side of the sea saw that
there was no other boat there except the one, and
that Jesus had not entered it with his disciples
but that his disciples had gone away alone.
23 However, there were some boats that came
from Tiberias close to the place where they
had eaten the bread loaves after the Lord had
given thanks. 24 When the crowd discovered
that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there,
they themselves got into the boats and went to
Capernaum seeking Jesus. 25 After they found
him on the other side of the sea, they said to
him, “Rabbi, when did you come here?” 26 Jesus
replied to them, saying, “Truly, truly, you seek
me, not because you saw signs, but because you
ate some of the bread loaves and were filled.
27 Do not work for the food that perishes, but
work for the food that endures to eternal life
which the Son of Man will give you, for God the
Father has set his seal on him.” 28 Then they said
to him, “What must we do, so that we may do
the works of God?” 29 Jesus replied and said to
them, “This is the work of God: That you believe
in the one whom he has sent.” 30 So they said to
him, “What sign then will you do, so that we may
see and believe you? What will you do? 31 Our
fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, as it
is written, 'He gave them bread from heaven to
eat.'” 32 Then Jesus replied to them, “Truly, truly,
it was not Moses who gave you the bread out of
heaven, but it is my Father who is giving you

John 6:33

xix

John 6:48

the true bread from heaven. 33 For the bread of
God is that which comes down from heaven and
gives life to the world.” 34 So they said to him,
“Sir, give us this bread always.” 35 Jesus said to
them, “I am the bread of life; he who comes to
me will not be hungry, and he who believes in
me will never be thirsty. 36 But I told you that
indeed you have seen me, and you do not believe.
37 Everyone whom the Father gives me will come
to me, and he who comes to me I will certainly
not throw out. 38 For I have come down from
heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of
him who sent me. 39 This is the will of him who
sent me, that I would lose not one of all those
whom he has given me, but will raise them up on
the last day. 40 For this is the will of my Father,
that everyone who sees the Son and believes in
him would have eternal life and I will raise him
up on the last day.”
41 Then the Jews grumbled about him because
he had said, “I am the bread that has come down
from heaven.” 42 They said, “Is not this Jesus son
of Joseph, whose father and mother we know?
How then does he now say, 'I have come down
from heaven'?” 43 Jesus replied and said to them,
“Stop grumbling among yourselves. 44 No one
can come to me unless the Father who sent me
draws him, and I will raise him up on the last
day. 45 It is written in the prophets, 'Everyone
will be taught by God.' Everyone who has heard
and learned from the Father comes to me. 46 Not
that anyone has seen the Father, except he who
is from God—he has seen the Father. 47 Truly,
truly, he who believes has eternal life. 48 I am

John 6:49

xx

John 6:63

the bread of life. 49 Your fathers ate the manna
in the wilderness, and they died. 50 This is the
bread which comes down from heaven, so that
a person may eat some of it and not die. 51 I am
the living bread that came down from heaven.
If anyone eats some of this bread, he will live
forever. The bread that I will give is my flesh for
the life of the world.”
52 The Jews became angry among themselves
and began to argue, saying, “How can this man
give us his flesh to eat?” 53 Then Jesus said to
them, “Truly, truly, unless you eat the flesh of
the Son of Man and drink his blood, you will not
have life in yourselves. 54 Whoever eats my flesh
and drinks my blood has everlasting life, and I
will raise him up at the last day. 55 For my flesh
is true food, and my blood is true drink. 56 He
who eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains
in me, and I in him. 57 As the living Father sent
me, and as I live because of the Father, so he who
eats me, he will also live because of me. 58 This
is the bread that has come down from heaven,
not as the fathers ate and died. He who eats this
bread will live forever.” 59 But Jesus said these
things in the synagogue while he was teaching
in Capernaum.
60 Then many of his disciples who heard this
said, “This is a difficult teaching; who can accept
it?” 61 Jesus, because he knew in himself that his
disciples were grumbling at this, said to them,
“Does this offend you? 62 Then what if you
should see the Son of Man going up to where he
was before? 63 It is the Spirit who makes alive;

John 6:64

xxi

John 7:4

the flesh profits nothing. The words that I have
spoken to you are spirit, and they are life. 64 Yet
there are some of you who do not believe.” For
Jesus knew from the beginning who were the
ones that would not believe and who it was who
would betray him. 65 He said, “It is because of
this that I said to you that no one can come to
me unless it is granted to him by the Father.”
66 Because of this, many of his disciples went
away and no longer walked with him. 67 Then
Jesus said to the twelve, “You do not want to go
away also, do you?” 68 Simon Peter answered
him, “Lord, to whom shall we go? You have
words of eternal life, 69 and we have believed and
come to know that you are the Holy One of God.”
* 70 Jesus said to them, “Did not I choose you,
the twelve, and one of you is a devil?” 71 Now he
spoke of Judas son of Simon Iscariot, for it was
he, one of the twelve, who would betray Jesus.
1 After

7

these things Jesus traveled about in
Galilee, for he did not want to go into Judea
because the Jews were seeking to kill him. 2 Now
the Jewish Festival of Shelters was near. 3 His
brothers therefore said to him, “Leave this place
and go to Judea, so that your disciples also
may see the works that you do. 4 No one does
anything in secret if he himself wants to be
* 6:69 The phrase the Holy One of God is in the best ancient

copies. Some later copies add an additional description and they
read: the Christ, the Holy One of God .

John 7:5

xxii

John 7:19

known openly. If you do these things, show
yourself to the world.” 5 For even his brothers
did not believe in him. 6 Jesus therefore said to
them, “My time has not yet come, but your time
is always ready. 7 The world cannot hate you,
but it hates me because I testify about it that its
works are evil. 8 You go up to the festival; I am
not going to this festival because my time has not
yet been fulfilled.” 9 After he said these things to
them, he stayed in Galilee.
10 But when his brothers had gone up to the

festival, then he also went up, not publicly but in
secret. 11 The Jews were looking for him at the
festival and said, “Where is he?” 12 There was
much discussion among the crowds about him.
Some said, “He is a good man.” Others said, “No,
he leads the crowds astray.” 13 Yet no one spoke
openly about him for fear of the Jews.
14 When

the festival was already half over,
Jesus went up into the temple and began to teach.
15 Then the Jews marveled, saying, “How does
this man know so much? He has never been
educated.” 16 Jesus answered them and said,
“My teaching is not mine, but is of him who
sent me. 17 If anyone wishes to do his will,
he will know about this teaching, whether it
comes from God, or whether I speak from myself.
18 Whoever speaks from himself seeks his own
glory, but whoever seeks the glory of him who
sent him, that person is true, and there is no
unrighteousness in him. 19 Did not Moses give
you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law. Why

John 7:20

xxiii

John 7:33

do you seek to kill me?” 20 The crowd answered,
“You have a demon. Who seeks to kill you?”
21 Jesus answered and said to them, “I did one
work, and you all marvel because of it. 22 Moses
gave you circumcision (not that it is from Moses,
but from the ancestors), and on the Sabbath
you circumcise a man. 23 If a man receives
circumcision on the Sabbath so that the law of
Moses is not broken, why are you angry with
me because I made a man completely healthy
on the Sabbath? 24 Do not judge according to
appearance, but judge righteously.”
25 Some of them from Jerusalem said, “Is not
this the one they seek to kill? 26 See, he speaks

openly, and they say nothing to him. It cannot be
that the rulers indeed know that this is the Christ,
can it? 27 Yet we know where this one is from.
But when the Christ comes, no one will know
where he is from.” 28 Then Jesus cried out in the
temple, teaching and saying, “You both know me
and know where I come from. I have not come
of myself, but he who sent me is true, and you
do not know him. 29 I know him because I come
from him and he sent me.” 30 They were trying
to arrest him, but no one laid a hand on him
because his hour had not yet come. 31 But many
in the crowd believed in him, and they said,
“When the Christ comes, will he do more signs
than what this one has done?” 32 The Pharisees
heard the crowds whispering these things about
Jesus, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent
officers to arrest him. 33 Jesus then said, “I am
still with you for a short amount of time, and

John 7:34

xxiv

John 7:48

then I go to him who sent me. 34 You will seek
me but you will not find me; where I go, you will
not be able to come.” 35 The Jews therefore said
among themselves, “Where will this man go that
we will not be able to find him? Will he go to
the dispersion among the Greeks and teach the
Greeks? 36 What is this word that he said, 'You
will seek me but will not find me; where I go,
you will not be able to come'?”
37 Now on the last, great day of the festival,

Jesus stood and cried out, saying, “If anyone is
thirsty, let him come to me and drink. 38 He who
believes in me, just as the scripture says, rivers of
living water will flow from his stomach.” 39 But
he said this about the Spirit, whom those who
believed in him would receive; the Spirit had
not yet been given because Jesus was not yet
glorified. 40 Some of the crowd, when they heard
these words, said, “This is indeed the prophet.”
41 Others said, “This is the Christ.” But some said,
“Does the Christ come from Galilee? 42 Have the
scriptures not said that the Christ will come from
the descendants of David and from Bethlehem,
the village where David was?” 43 So there arose
a division in the crowds because of him. 44 Some
of them would have arrested him, but no one laid
hands on him.
45 Then the officers came back to the chief
priests and Pharisees, who said to them, “Why
did you not bring him?” 46 The officers answered, “Never has anyone spoken like this.”
47 So the Pharisees answered them, “Have you
also been deceived? 48 Have any of the rulers

John 7:49

xxv

John 8:8

believed in him, or any of the Pharisees? 49 But
this crowd that does not know the law, they are
cursed.” 50 Nicodemus (one of the Pharisees, who
came to him earlier) said to them, 51 “Does our
law judge a man before hearing from him and
knowing what he does?” 52 They answered and
said to him, “Are you also from Galilee? Search
and see that no prophet comes from Galilee.”
53 * [Then everyone went to his own house.

8

1 * Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. 2 Early

in the morning he came to the temple again, and
all the people came; he sat down and taught
them. 3 The scribes and the Pharisees brought
a woman caught in the act of adultery. They
placed her in the middle. 4 † Then they said to
him, “Teacher, this woman has been caught in
the act of adultery. 5 Now in the law, Moses
commanded us to stone such people; what do
you say about her?” 6 They said this in order
to trap him so that they might have something
to accuse him about, but Jesus bent down and
wrote on the ground with his finger. 7 ‡ When
they continued asking him questions, he stood
up and said to them, “The one among you who
has no sin, let him be the first to throw a stone at
her.” 8 Again he stooped down, and wrote on the
* 7:53 The best ancient copies omit Jhn. 7:53-8:11

* 8:1 See
† 8:4 See the note about

the note about Jhn. 7:53-8:11 above
‡ 8:7 See the note about Jhn. 7:53-8:11
John 7:53-8:11 above
above

John 8:9

xxvi

John 8:21

ground with his finger. 9 § When they heard it,
they left one by one, beginning with the oldest.
Finally Jesus was left alone, with the woman who
had been in the middle. 10 Jesus stood up and
said to her, “Woman, where are your accusers?
Did no one condemn you?” 11 She said, “No one,
Lord.” Jesus said, “Neither do I condemn you.
Go and sin no more.”]
12 Again Jesus spoke to them, saying, “I am the
light of the world; he who follows me will not
walk in the darkness but will have the light of
life.” 13 The Pharisees said to him, “You bear
witness about yourself; your witness is not true.”
14 Jesus answered and said to them, “Even if I
bear witness about myself, my witness is true.
I know where I came from and where I am
going, but you do not know where I came from
or where I am going. 15 You judge according
the flesh; I judge no one. 16 Yet if I judge, my
judgment is true because I am not alone, but I am
with the Father who sent me. 17 Yes, and in your
law it is written that the testimony of two men is
true. 18 I am he who bears witness about myself,
and the Father who sent me bears witness about
me.” 19 They said to him, “Where is your father?”
Jesus answered, “You know neither me nor my
Father; if you had known me, you would have
known my Father also.” 20 He said these words
in the treasury as he taught in the temple, and
no one arrested him because his hour had not
yet come.
21 So again he said to them, “I am going away;
§ 8:9 See the note about Jhn. 7:53-8:11 above

John 8:22

xxvii

John 8:35

you will seek me and will die in your sin. Where
I am going, you cannot come.” 22 The Jews said,
“Will he kill himself? Is that why he says, 'Where
I am going you cannot come'?” 23 Jesus said to
them, “You are from below; I am from above.
You are of this world; I am not of this world.
24 Therefore, I said to you that you will die in
your sins. For unless you believe that I AM, you
will die in your sins.” 25 They said therefore to
him, “Who are you?” Jesus said to them, “What
I have said to you from the beginning. 26 I have
many things to speak and to judge about you.
However, he who sent me is true; and the things
that I heard from him, these things I say to the
world.” 27 They did not understand that he was
speaking to them about the Father. 28 Jesus said,
“When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then
will you know that I AM, and that I do nothing
of myself. As the Father taught me, I speak these
things. 29 He who sent me is with me, and he
has not left me alone, because I always do what
is pleasing to him.” 30 As Jesus was saying these
things, many believed in him.
31 Jesus said to those Jews who had believed
him, “If you remain in my word, then you are
truly my disciples; 32 and you will know the
truth, and the truth will set you free.” 33 They
answered him, “We are descendants of Abraham
and have never been slaves of anyone; how can
you say, 'You will be set free'?” 34 Jesus answered
them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, everyone who
commits sin is the slave of sin. 35 The slave
does not remain in the house forever; the son

John 8:36

xxviii

John 8:49

remains forever. 36 Therefore, if the Son sets
you free, you will be truly free. 37 I know that
you are Abraham's descendants; you seek to
kill me because my word has no place in you.
38 I say what I have seen with my Father, and
you also do what you heard from your father.”
39 They answered and said to him, “Our father
is Abraham.” Jesus said to them, “If you were
Abraham's children, you would do the works of
Abraham. 40 Yet, now you seek to kill me, a man
who has told you the truth that I heard from God.
Abraham did not do this. 41 You do the works of
your father.” They said to him, “We were not
born in sexual immorality; we have one Father:
God.” 42 Jesus said to them, “If God were your
Father, you would love me, for I came from God
and am here; for neither have I come of myself,
but he sent me. 43 Why do you not understand
my words? It is because you cannot hear my
words. 44 You are of your father, the devil, and
you wish to do the desires of your father. He
was a murderer from the beginning and does not
stand in the truth because there is no truth in
him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks from his
own nature because he is a liar and the father of
lies. 45 Yet, because I speak the truth, you do not
believe me. 46 Which one of you convicts me of
sin? If I speak the truth, why do you not believe
me? 47 He who is of God hears the words of God;
you do not hear them because you are not of
God.” 48 The Jews answered and said to him,
“Do we not truly say that you are a Samaritan
and have a demon?” 49 Jesus answered, “I do

John 8:50

xxix

John 9:4

not have a demon, but I honor my Father, and
you dishonor me. 50 I do not seek my glory;
there is one seeking and judging. 51 Truly, truly,
I say to you, if anyone keeps my word, he will
never see death.” 52 The Jews said to him, “Now
we know that you have a demon. Abraham and
the prophets died; but you say, 'If anyone keeps
my word, he will never taste death.' 53 You are
not greater than our father Abraham who died,
are you? The prophets also died. Who do you
make yourself out to be?” 54 Jesus answered,
“If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing; it is
my Father who glorifies me—about whom you
say that he is your God. 55 You have not known
him, but I know him. If I would say, 'I do not
know him,' I would be like you, a liar. However,
I know him and keep his word. 56 Your father
Abraham rejoiced at seeing my day; he saw it
and was glad.” 57 The Jews said to him, “You
are not yet fifty years old, and you have seen
Abraham?” 58 Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I
say to you, before Abraham was, I AM.” 59 Then
they picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus
hid himself and went out of the temple.

9

1 Now as Jesus passed by, he saw a man blind
from birth. 2 His disciples asked him, “Rabbi,

who sinned, this man or his parents, so that he
was born blind?” 3 Jesus answered, “Neither did
this man sin, nor his parents, but so that the
works of God would be revealed in him. 4 We
must work the works of him who sent me while

John 9:5

xxx

John 9:18

it is day. Night is coming when no one will be
able to work. 5 While I am in the world, I am
the light of the world.” 6 After Jesus said these
things, he spit on the ground, made mud with the
saliva, and smeared the mud on his eyes. 7 He
said to him, “Go, wash in the pool of Siloam,”
(which is translated “Sent”). So the man went
away, washed, and came back seeing. 8 Then the
man's neighbors and those who had seen him
previously as a beggar were saying, “Is not this
the man that used to sit and beg?” 9 Some said,
“It is he.” Others said, “No, but he is like him.”
But he said, “It is me.” 10 They said to him, “Then
how were your eyes opened?” 11 He answered,
“The man who is called Jesus made mud and
smeared it on my eyes and said to me, 'Go to
Siloam and wash.' So I went and washed, and I
received my sight.” 12 They said to him, “Where
is he?” He replied, “I do not know.”
13 They brought the man who used to be blind
to the Pharisees. 14 Now it was the Sabbath day
when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes.
15 Then again the Pharisees asked him how he
had received his sight. He said to them, “He
put mud on my eyes, I washed, and I now can
see.” 16 Some of the Pharisees said, “This man
is not from God because he does not keep the
Sabbath.” Others said, “How can a man who is a
sinner do such signs?” So there was a division
among them. 17 So they asked the blind man
again, “What do you say about him, since he
opened your eyes?” The blind man said, “He is
a prophet.” 18 Now the Jews still did not believe

John 9:19

xxxi

John 9:31

about him that he was blind and had received
his sight until they called the parents of him who
had received his sight. 19 They asked the parents,
“Is this your son whom you say was born blind?
How then does he now see?” 20 So his parents
answered them, “We know that this is our son
and that he was born blind. 21 How he now sees,
we do not know, and who opened his eyes, we do
not know. Ask him, he is an adult. He can speak
for himself.” 22 His parents said these things,
because they were afraid of the Jews. For the
Jews had already agreed that if anyone would
confess him to be the Christ, he would be thrown
out of the synagogue. 23 Because of this, his
parents said, “He is an adult, ask him.” 24 So
for a second time they called the man who had
been blind and said to him, “Give glory to God.
We know that this man is a sinner.” 25 Then that
man replied, “I do not know if he is a sinner.
One thing I do know: I was blind, and now I
see.” 26 Then they said to him, “What did he
do to you? How did he open your eyes?” 27 He
answered, “I have told you already, and you did
not listen! Why do you want to hear it again?
You do not want to become his disciples too, do
you? 28 They insulted him and said, “You are his
disciple, but we are disciples of Moses. 29 We
know that God has spoken to Moses, but we do
not know where this one is from.” 30 The man
answered and said to them, “This is remarkable,
that you do not know where he is from, and yet
he opened my eyes. 31 We know that God does
not listen to sinners, but if someone is devout

John 9:32

xxxii

John 10:4

and does his will, he listens to him. 32 Since the
world began it has never been heard that anyone
opened the eyes of a man born blind. 33 If this
man were not from God, he could do nothing.”
34 They answered and said to him, “You were
completely born in sins, and you are teaching
us?” Then they threw him out.
35 Jesus heard that they had cast him out of
the synagogue. He found him and said, “Do
you believe in the Son of Man?” 36 He replied
and said, “Who is he, Lord, that I may believe
in him?” 37 Jesus said to him, “You have seen
him, and it is the one who is speaking with
you.” 38 The man said, “Lord, I believe” and he
worshiped him. 39 Jesus said, “For judgment I
came into this world so that those who do not see
may see and so that those who see may become
blind.” 40 Some of the Pharisees who were with
him heard these things and asked him, “Are we
also blind?” 41 Jesus said to them, “If you were
blind, you would have no sin, but now you say,
'We see,' so your sin remains.”

10

1 “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not

enter through the gate into the sheep pen, but
climbs up some other way, that man is a thief
and a robber. 2 He who enters through the gate
is the shepherd of the sheep. 3 The gatekeeper
opens for him. The sheep hear his voice, and
he calls his own sheep by name and leads them
out. 4 When he has brought out all his own,
he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow

John 10:5

xxxiii

John 10:18

him, for they know his voice. 5 They will not
follow a stranger but instead they will avoid him,
for they do not know the voice of strangers.”
6 Jesus spoke this parable to them, but they did
not understand what these things were that he
was saying to them.
7 Then Jesus said to them again, “Truly, truly, I
say to you, I am the gate of the sheep. 8 Everyone
who came before me is a thief and a robber, but
the sheep did not listen to them. 9 I am the gate.
If anyone enters in through me, he will be saved;
he will go in and out and will find pasture. 10 The
thief does not come if he would not steal and
kill and destroy. I have come so that they will
have life and have it abundantly. 11 I am the
good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down
his life for the sheep. 12 The hired servant is
not a shepherd and does not own the sheep. He
sees the wolf coming and abandons the sheep
and escapes, and the wolf carries them off and
scatters them. 13 He runs away because he is a
hired servant and does not care for the sheep.
14 I am the good shepherd, and I know my own,
and my own know me. 15 The Father knows me,
and I know the Father, and I lay down my life
for the sheep. 16 I have other sheep that are not
of this sheep pen. I must bring them also, and
they will hear my voice so that there will be one
flock and one shepherd. 17 This is why the Father
loves me: I lay down my life so that I may take
it again. 18 No one takes it away from me, but I
lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it
down, and I have authority to take it up again. I

John 10:19

xxxiv

John 10:35

have received this command from my Father.”
19 A division again occurred among the Jews
because of these words. 20 Many of them said,

“He has a demon and is insane. Why do you
listen to him?” 21 Others said, “These are not the
words of a demon-possessed man. Can a demon
open the eyes of the blind?”
22 Then it was time for the Festival of the
Dedication in Jerusalem. 23 It was winter, and
Jesus was walking in the temple in the porch
of Solomon. 24 Then the Jews surrounded him
and said to him, “How long will you hold us
doubting? If you are the Christ, tell us openly.”
25 Jesus replied to them, “I told you, but you do
not believe. The works that I do in the name
of my Father, these testify concerning me. 26 Yet
you do not believe because you are not my sheep.
27 My sheep hear my voice; I know them, and
they follow me. 28 I give them eternal life; they
will never die, and no one will snatch them out
of my hand. 29 My Father, who has given them
to me, is greater than all others, and no one
is able to snatch them out of the hand of the
Father. 30 I and the Father are one.” 31 Then the
Jews took up stones again to stone him. 32 Jesus
answered them, “I have shown you many good
works from the Father. For which of those works
are you stoning me?” 33 The Jews answered him,
“We are not stoning you for any good work, but
for blasphemy, because you, a man, are making
yourself God.” 34 Jesus answered them, “Is it
not written in your law, 'I said, “You are gods”'?
35 If he called them gods, to whom the word of

John 10:36

xxxv

John 11:7

God came (and the scripture cannot be broken),
36 do you say to him whom the Father set apart
and sent into the world, 'You are blaspheming,'
because I said, 'I am the Son of God'? 37 If I am
not doing the works of my Father, do not believe
me. 38 But if I am doing them, even if you do
not believe me, believe in the works so that you
may know and understand that the Father is in
me and that I am in the Father.” 39 They tried to
seize him again, but he went away out of their
hand.
40 He went away again beyond the Jordan to
the place where John had first been baptizing,
and he stayed there. 41 Many people came to him
and they said, “John indeed did no signs, but all
the things that John has said about this man are
true.” 42 Many people believed in him there.

11

1 Now a certain man named Lazarus was sick.

He was from Bethany, the village of Mary and
her sister Martha. 2 It was Mary who anointed
the Lord with myrrh and wiped his feet with
her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick. 3 The
sisters then sent for Jesus, saying, “Lord, see, he
whom you love is sick.” 4 When Jesus heard
it, he said, “This sickness is not to death, but
instead it is for the glory of God so that the Son
of God may be glorified by it.” 5 Now Jesus loved
Martha and her sister and Lazarus. 6 So when
he heard that Lazarus was sick, Jesus stayed two
more days in the place where he was. 7 Then
after this, he said to the disciples, “Let us go

John 11:8

xxxvi

John 11:23

to Judea again.” 8 The disciples said to him,
“Rabbi, right now the Jews are trying to stone
you, and you are going back there again?” 9 Jesus
answered, “Are there not twelve hours of light in
a day? If someone walks in the daytime, he will
not stumble, because he sees by the light of this
world. 10 However, if he walks at night, he will
stumble because the light is not in him.” 11 He
said these things, and after these things, he said
to them, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep,
but I am going so that I may wake him out of
sleep.” 12 The disciples therefore said to him,
“Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover.”
13 Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but they
thought that he was speaking about the sleep
of resting. 14 Then Jesus said to them plainly,
“Lazarus is dead. 15 I am glad, for your sakes,
that I was not there so that you may believe.
Let us go to him.” 16 Thomas, who was called
Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, “Let us also
go so that we may die with Jesus.”
17 When Jesus came, he found that Lazarus had
already been in the tomb for four days. 18 Now

Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadia
away. 19 Many of the Jews had come to Martha
and Mary, to comfort them about their brother.
20 Then Martha, when she heard that Jesus was
coming, went to meet him, but Mary was sitting
in the house. 21 Martha then said to Jesus, “Lord,
if you had been here, my brother would not have
died. 22 Even now, I know that whatever you ask
from God, he will give to you.” 23 Jesus said to

John 11:24

xxxvii

John 11:38

her, “Your brother will rise again.” 24 Martha
said to him, “I know that he will rise again in
the resurrection on the last day.” 25 Jesus said to
her, “I am the resurrection and the life; he who
believes in me, even if he dies, will live; 26 and
whoever lives and believes in me will never die.
Do you believe this?” 27 She said to him, “Yes,
Lord, I believe that you are the Christ, the Son
of God, who is coming into the world.” 28 When
she had said this, she went away and called her
sister Mary privately. She said, “The Teacher is
here and is calling for you.” 29 When she heard
this, she got up quickly and went to him. 30 Now
Jesus had not yet come into the village but was
still in the place where Martha had met him.
31 So when the Jews, who were with her in the
house and who were comforting her, saw Mary
getting up quickly and going out, they followed
her, thinking that she was going to the tomb to
weep there. 32 When Mary came to the place
where Jesus was and saw him, she fell down at
his feet and said to him, “Lord, if you had been
here, my brother would not have died.” 33 When
Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who came
with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in
his spirit and was troubled; 34 he said, “Where
have you laid him?” They said to him, “Lord,
come and see.” 35 Jesus wept. 36 Then the Jews
said, “See how much he loved Lazarus!” 37 But
some of them said, “Could not this man, who
opened the eyes of a blind man, also have made
this man not die?” 38 Then Jesus again, being
deeply moved in himself, went to the tomb. Now

John 11:39

xxxviii

John 11:51

it was a cave, and a stone lay against it. 39 Jesus
said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the sister
of Lazarus, the one who had died, said to Jesus,
“Lord, by this time the body will be decaying,
for he has been dead for four days.” 40 Jesus
said to her, “Did I not say to you that, if you
believed, you would see the glory of God?” 41 So
they took away the stone. Jesus lifted up his eyes
and said, “Father, I thank you that you listened
to me. 42 I knew that you always listen to me, but
it is because of the crowd that is standing around
me that I said this, so that they may believe that
you have sent me.” 43 After he had said this, he
cried out with a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out!”
44 The dead man came out; his feet and hands
were bound with cloths, and his face was bound
about with a cloth. Jesus said to them, “Untie
him and let him go.”
45 Then many of the Jews who came to Mary
and saw what Jesus did, believed in him. 46 But
some of them went away to the Pharisees and
told them the things that Jesus had done.
47 Then the chief priests and the Pharisees
gathered the council together and said, “What
will we do? This man does many signs. 48 If
we leave him alone like this, all will believe
in him; the Romans will come and take away
both our place and our nation.” 49 However, a
certain man among them, Caiaphas, who was
high priest that year, said to them, “You know
nothing. 50 You do not consider that it is better
for you that one man dies for the people than
that the whole nation perishes.” 51 Now this he

John 11:52

xxxix

John 12:4

said not from himself. Instead, being high priest
that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for
the nation; 52 and not only for the nation, but so
that the children of God who are scattered would
be gathered together into one. 53 So from that
day onward they planned how to put Jesus to
death.
54 No longer did Jesus walk openly among
the Jews, but he departed from there into the
country near to the wilderness into a town called
Ephraim. There he stayed with the disciples.
55 Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and
many went up to Jerusalem from the country before the Passover in order to purify themselves.
56 They were looking for Jesus, and speaking
one with another as they stood in the temple,
“What do you think? That he will not come
to the festival?” 57 Now the chief priests and
the Pharisees had given an order that if anyone
knew where Jesus was, he should report it so that
they might seize him.

12

1 Six days before the Passover, Jesus came to

Bethany, where Lazarus, whom Jesus had raised
from the dead, was. 2 So they made him a dinner
there, and Martha was serving, but Lazarus was
one of those who was lying down at the table
with Jesus. 3 Then Mary took a litra of perfume
made of very precious pure nard, anointed the
feet of Jesus with it, and wiped his feet with her
hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of
the perfume. 4 Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples,

John 12:5

xl

John 12:17

the one who would betray him, said, 5 “Why was
this perfume not sold for three hundred denarii
and given to the poor?” 6 Now he said this, not
because he cared about the poor, but because he
was a thief. He had the moneybag and would
steal from what was put in it. 7 Jesus said, “Allow
her to keep what she has for the day of my burial.
8 You will always have the poor with you. But you
will not always have me.”
9 Now

a large crowd of the Jews learned
that Jesus was there, and they came, not only
for Jesus, but also to see Lazarus, whom Jesus
had raised from the dead. 10 The chief priests
conspired together so that they might also put
Lazarus to death; 11 for it was because of him
that many of the Jews went away and believed
in Jesus.
12 On the next day a great crowd came to the

festival. When they heard that Jesus was coming
to Jerusalem, 13 they took the branches of the
palm trees and went out to meet him and cried
out, “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the
name of the Lord, the King of Israel.” 14 Jesus
found a young donkey and sat on it; as it was
written, 15 “Do not fear, daughter of Zion; see,
your King is coming, sitting on the colt of a
donkey.” 16 His disciples did not understand
these things at first; but when Jesus was glorified,
they remembered that these things had been
written about him and that they had done these
things to him. 17 Now the crowd testified that
they had been with him when he called Lazarus

John 12:18

xli

John 12:32

out of the tomb and raised him up from the dead.
18 It was also for this reason that the crowd went
out to meet him, because they heard that he had
done this sign. 19 The Pharisees therefore said
among themselves, “Look, you can do nothing;
see, the world has gone after him.”
20 Now certain Greeks were among those who
were going up to worship at the festival. 21 These
went to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in
Galilee, and asked him, saying, “Sir, we want
to see Jesus.” 22 Philip went and told Andrew;
Andrew went with Philip, and they told Jesus.
23 Jesus answered them and said, “The hour has
come for the Son of Man to be glorified. 24 Truly,
truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls
into the earth and dies, it remains by itself alone;
but if it dies, it will bear much fruit. 25 He who
loves his life will lose it; but he who hates his
life in this world will keep it for eternal life. 26 If
anyone serves me, let him follow me; and where
I am, there will my servant also be. If anyone
serves me, the Father will honor him. 27 Now my
soul is troubled and what should I say? 'Father,
save me from this hour'? But for this reason I
came to this hour. 28 Father, glorify your name.”
Then a voice came from heaven and said, “I have
glorified it and I will glorify it again.” 29 Then the
crowd that stood by and heard it said that it had
thundered. Others said, “An angel has spoken
to him.” 30 Jesus answered and said, “This voice
did not come for me, but for you. 31 Now is the
judgment of this world: Now will the ruler of
this world be thrown out. 32 When I am lifted up

John 12:33

xlii

John 12:42

from the earth, I will draw everyone to myself.”
33 He said this to indicate what kind of death
he would die. 34 The crowd answered him, “We
have heard from the law that the Christ will stay
forever. How can you say, 'The Son of Man must
be lifted up'? Who is this Son of Man?” 35 Jesus
then said to them, “The light will still be with you
for a short amount of time. Walk while you have
the light, so that darkness does not overtake you.
He who walks in the darkness does not know
where he is going. 36 While you have the light,
believe in the light so that you may be sons of
light.”
Jesus said these things and then departed and
hid from them. 37 Although Jesus had done so
many signs before them, yet they did not believe
in him 38 so that the word of Isaiah the prophet
would be fulfilled, in which he said:
“Lord, who has believed our report,
and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed?”
39 For this reason they could not believe, for
Isaiah had also said,
40 “He has blinded their eyes, and he has hardened their hearts;
otherwise they would see with their eyes and
understand with their hearts,
and turn,
and I would heal them.”
41 Isaiah said these things because he saw the
glory of Jesus and spoke of him. 42 But despite
that, many of the rulers believed in Jesus; but
because of the Pharisees, they did not admit
it so that they would not be banned from the

John 12:43

xliii

John 13:4

synagogue. 43 They loved the praise that comes
from people more than the praise that comes
from God.
44 Jesus cried out and said, “The one who
believes in me, believes not only in me but also
in him who sent me, 45 and the one who sees me
sees him who sent me. 46 I have come as a light
into the world, so that whoever believes in me
may not remain in the darkness. 47 If anyone
hears my words but does not keep them, I do
not judge him; for I have not come to judge the
world, but to save the world. 48 The one who
rejects me and who does not receive my words,
has one who judges him. The word I have spoken
will judge him on the last day. 49 For I did not
speak for myself, but it is the Father who sent
me, who has given me the command about what
to say and what to speak. 50 I know that his
command is eternal life, so that is what I say—
just as the Father has spoken to me, so I speak.”

13

Now it was before the Festival of the
Passover. Jesus knew that his hour had come
to go out of this world and go to the Father.
Having loved his own who were in the world,
he loved them to the end. 2 Now the devil had
already put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot son
of Simon, to betray Jesus. 3 He knew that the
Father had given everything over into his hands
and that he had come from God and was going
back to God. 4 He got up from dinner and took
off his outer clothing. Then he took a towel and
1

John 13:5

xliv

John 13:18

wrapped it around himself. 5 Then he poured
water into a basin and began to wash the feet of
the disciples and dry them with the towel that
he had put around himself. 6 He came to Simon
Peter, and Peter said to him, “Lord, are you going
to wash my feet?” 7 Jesus answered and said to
him, “What I am doing you do not understand
now, but you will understand this later.” 8 Peter
said to him, “You will never wash my feet.” Jesus
answered him, “If I do not wash you, you have
no share with me.” 9 Simon Peter said to him,
“Lord, do not only wash my feet, but also my
hands and my head.” 10 Jesus said to him, “He
who is bathed has no need, except to wash his
feet, but he is completely clean; you are clean,
but not everyone.” 11 (For Jesus knew who would
betray him; that is why he said, “Not all of you
are clean.”)
12 So when Jesus had washed their feet and

taken his garments and sat down again, he said
to them, “Do you know what I have done for you?
13 You call me 'teacher' and 'Lord,' and you are
speaking correctly, because so I am. 14 If I then,
the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet,
you should also wash the feet of one another.
15 For I have given you an example so that you
should also do just as I did for you. 16 Truly,
truly, I say to you, a servant is not greater than
his master; nor is a messenger greater than he
who sent him. 17 If you know these things, you
are blessed if you do them. 18 I am not speaking
about all of you; I know those whom I have

John 13:19

xlv

John 13:31

chosen—but this so that the scripture will be
fulfilled: 'He who eats my bread lifted up his
heel against me.' 19 I tell you this now before
it happens so that when it happens, you may
believe that I AM. 20 Truly, truly, I say to you,
he who receives whomever I sent, receives me,
and he who receives me, receives him who sent
me.”
21 When Jesus said this, he was troubled in
spirit. He testified and said, “Truly, truly, I say
to you that one of you will betray me.” 22 The
disciples looked at each other, wondering of
whom he was speaking. 23 One of his disciples,
whom Jesus loved, was lying down at the table
against Jesus' side. 24 Simon Peter motioned
to this disciple and said, “Ask him who he is
speaking about.” 25 So he leaned back against
the side of Jesus and said to him, “Lord, who
is it?” 26 Then Jesus answered, “It is the one
for whom I will dip the piece of bread and give
it him.” So when he had dipped the bread, he
gave it to Judas son of Simon Iscariot. 27 Then
after the bread, Satan entered into him, so Jesus
said to him, “What you are doing, do it quickly.”
28 Now no one who was lying down at the table
knew why he said this to him. 29 Some thought
that, since Judas had the moneybag, Jesus said to
him, “Buy what we need to have for the festival,”
or that he should give something to the poor.
30 After Judas received the bread, he went out
immediately. It was night.
31 When Judas was gone, Jesus said, “Now the
Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in

John 13:32

xlvi

John 14:7

him. 32 God will glorify him in himself, and he
will glorify him immediately. 33 Little children, I
am with you for still a short amount of time. You
will look for me, and as I said to the Jews, 'Where
I am going, you cannot come.' Now I also say this
to you. 34 I am giving you a new commandment,
that you should love one another; as I have
loved you, so also you should love one another.
35 By this everyone will know that you are my
disciples, if you have love one for another.”
36 Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are
you going?” Jesus answered, “Where I am going,
you cannot follow me now, but you will follow
later.” 37 Peter said to him, “Lord, why can I not
follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.”
38 Jesus answered, “Will you lay down your life
for me? Truly, truly, I say to you, the rooster
will not crow before you have denied me three
times.”

14

not let your heart be troubled. You
believe in God, believe also in me. 2 In the house
of my Father are many rooms. If it were not so,
I would have told you, for I am going to prepare
a place for you. 3 If I go and prepare a place for
you, I will come again and receive you to myself,
so that where I am you will also be. 4 You know
the way to where I am going.” 5 Thomas said
to Jesus, “Lord, we do not know where you are
going, how can we know the way?” 6 Jesus said
to him, “I am the way, the truth, and the life; no
one comes to the Father except through me. 7 If
1 “Do

John 14:8

xlvii

John 14:21

you had known me, you would have known my
Father also. From now on you know him and
have seen him.” 8 Philip said to Jesus, “Lord,
show us the Father, and that will be enough for
us.” 9 Jesus said to him, “I have been with you
for so long and you still do not know me, Philip?
Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. How
can you say, 'Show us the Father'? 10 Do you not
believe that I am in the Father and the Father
is in me? The words that I say to you I do not
speak from my own authority, but the Father
living in me is doing his work. 11 Believe me
that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me,
or else believe because of the works themselves.
12 Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes in
me will do the works that I do, and he will do
greater works than these because I am going to
the Father. 13 Whatever you ask in my name,
I will do it so that the Father will be glorified
in the Son. 14 If you ask me anything in my
name, I will do it. 15 If you love me, you will
keep my commandments, 16 and I will pray to the
Father, and he will give you another Comforter
so that he will be with you forever— 17 the Spirit
of truth. The world cannot receive him because
it does not see him or know him. But you know
him, for he lives with you and will be in you.
18 I will not leave you alone; I will come back
to you. 19 Yet a short amount of time and the
world will no longer see me, but you see me.
Because I live, you will also live. 20 On that day
you will know that I am in my Father, and that
you are in me, and that I am in you. 21 He who

John 14:22

xlviii

John 14:31

has my commandments and keeps them is the
one who loves me, and he who loves me will be
loved by my Father, and I will love him and I
will show myself to him.” 22 Judas (not Iscariot)
said to Jesus, “Lord, why is it that you will show
yourself to us and not to the world?” 23 Jesus
answered and said to him, “If anyone loves me,
he will keep my word. My Father will love him,
and we will come to him and we will make our
home with him. 24 He who does not love me does
not keep my words. The word that you hear is
not from me but from the Father who sent me.
25 I have said these things to you, while I am
staying with you. 26 However, the Comforter—

the Holy Spirit whom the Father will send in my
name—he will teach you everything and he will
remind you of everything that I said to you. 27 I
leave you peace; I give you my peace. I do not
give it as the world gives. Do not let your heart
be troubled, and do not be afraid. 28 You heard
that I said to you, 'I am going away, and I will
come back to you.' If you loved me, you would
be glad because I am going to the Father, for the
Father is greater than I am. 29 Now I have told
you before it happens so that, when it happens,
you will believe. 30 I will no longer speak much
with you, for the ruler of this world is coming.
He has no power over me, 31 but in order that
the world will know that I love the Father, I do
just as the Father commanded me. Let us get up
and go from here.”

John 15:1

xlix

John 15:15

15

1 “I am the true vine, and my Father is the
gardener. 2 He takes away every branch in me

that does not bear fruit, and he prunes every
branch that bears fruit so that it will bear more
fruit. 3 You are already clean because of the
message that I have spoken to you. 4 Remain
in me, and I in you. Just as a branch cannot
bear fruit by itself unless it remains in the vine,
so neither can you, unless you remain in me.
5 I am the vine, you are the branches. He who
remains in me and I in him, he bears much
fruit, for without me you can do nothing. 6 If
anyone does not remain in me, he is thrown
away like a branch and dries up, and they gather
the branches and throw them into the fire, and
they are burned up. 7 If you remain in me, and
if my words remain in you, ask whatever you
wish, and it will be done for you. 8 My Father is
glorified in this, that you bear much fruit and so
prove that you are my disciples. 9 As the Father
has loved me, I have also loved you. Remain
in my love. 10 If you keep my commandments,
you will remain in my love, as I have kept the
commandments of my Father and remain in his
love. 11 I have spoken these things to you so that
my joy will be in you and so that your joy will be
complete. 12 This is my commandment, that you
love one another as I have loved you. 13 No one
has greater love than this—that he lay down his
life for his friends. 14 You are my friends if you
do the things that I command you. 15 No longer
do I call you servants, for the servant does not

John 15:16

l

John 15:27

know what his master is doing. I have called
you friends, for everything that I heard from my
Father, I have made known to you. 16 You did
not choose me, but I chose you and appointed
you so that you would go and bear fruit, and
that your fruit should remain. This is so that
whatever you ask of the Father in my name, he
will give it to you. 17 These things I command
you, so that you love one another. 18 If the world
hates you, know that it has hated me before
it hated you. 19 If you were of the world, the
world would love you as its own. But because
you are not of the world and because I chose
you out of the world, therefore the world hates
you. 20 Remember the word that I said to you,
'A servant is not greater than his master.' If they
persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if
they kept my word, they will also keep yours.
21 They will do all these things to you because
of my name, because they do not know him who
sent me. 22 If I had not come and spoken to them,
they would not have sin, but now they have no
excuse for their sin. 23 He who hates me also
hates my Father. 24 If I had not done the works
that no one else did among them, they would
have no sin, but now they have seen and hated
both me and my Father. 25 But this is in order
to fulfill the word that is written in their law,
'They hated me without a cause.' 26 When the
Comforter—whom I will send to you from the
Father, that is, the Spirit of truth, who goes out
from the Father—comes, he will testify about me.
27 You are also testifying because you have been

John 16:1

li

John 16:13

with me from the beginning.

16

1 “I have spoken these things to you so that
you will not fall away. 2 They will throw you

out of the synagogues. But the hour is coming
when everyone who kills you will think that he
is offering a service to God. 3 They will do these
things because they have not known the Father
nor me. 4 I have spoken these things to you so
that when their hour comes, you will remember
that I told you about them. I did not tell you
about these things in the beginning, because I
was with you. 5 But now I go to him who sent
me, yet none of you asks me, 'Where are you
going?' 6 But because I have said these things to
you, sadness has filled your heart. 7 But truly I
tell you, it is better for you that I go away. For if
I do not go away, the Comforter will not come to
you, but if I go, I will send him to you. 8 When he
comes, the Comforter will prove the world to be
wrong about sin, about righteousness, and about
judgment— 9 about sin, because they do not
believe in me; 10 about righteousness, because I
am going to the Father, and you will no longer
see me; 11 and about judgment, because the
ruler of this world has been judged. 12 I have
many things to say to you, but you would not
understand them now. 13 But when he, the Spirit
of Truth, comes, he will guide you into all the
truth, for he will not speak from himself. But he
will say whatever he hears, and he will tell you

John 16:14

lii

John 16:24

things that are to come. 14 He will glorify me,
because he will take from what is mine and he
will tell it to you. 15 Everything that the Father
has is mine. Therefore, I said that the Spirit
will take from what is mine and he will tell it
to you. 16 In a short amount of time you will no
longer see me, and after another short amount
of time you will see me.” 17 Then some of his
disciples said to one another, “What is this that
he says to us, 'A short amount of time you will no
longer see me and after another short amount of
time you will see me,' and, 'Because I go to the
Father'?” 18 Therefore they said, “What is this
that he says, 'A short amount of time'? We do
not know what he is talking about.” 19 Jesus saw
that they wanted to ask him, and he said to them,
“Is this what you are asking yourselves, what I
meant by saying, 'A little while and you will no
longer see me, and again a little while and you
will see me'? 20 Truly, truly, I say to you, you will
weep and lament, but the world will be glad. You
will become full of sadness, but your sorrow will
be turned into joy. 21 When a woman gives birth
she has sadness because her hour has come, but
when she has given birth to the child, she no
longer remembers her pain because of her joy
that a man has been born into the world. 22 So
you have sadness now, but I will see you again,
and your heart will be glad, and no one will be
able to take away your joy from you. 23 On that
day you will not ask me anything. Truly, truly, I
say to you, if you ask anything of the Father in
my name, he will give it to you. 24 Until now you

John 16:25

liii

John 17:2

have not asked anything in my name. Ask, and
you will receive so that your joy will be fulfilled.
25 I have said these things to you in figures
of speech, but the hour is coming when I will
no longer speak to you in figures of speech, but
instead I will tell you plainly about the Father.
26 On that day you will ask in my name and
I do not say to you that I will pray to the
Father for you, 27 for the Father himself loves
you because you have loved me and because
you have believed that I came from the Father.
28 I came from the Father, and I have come into
the world. Again, I am leaving the world and
I am going to the Father.” 29 His disciples said,
“See, now you are speaking plainly and you are
not using figures of speech. 30 Now we know
that you know all things, and you do not need
anyone to ask you questions. Because of this, we
believe that you have come from God.” 31 Jesus
answered them, “Do you believe now? 32 See, the
hour is coming, yes, and has indeed come, when
you will be scattered, everyone to his own home,
and you will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone
because the Father is with me. 33 I have spoken
these things to you so that you will have peace
in me. In the world you have troubles, but have
courage, I have conquered the world.”
1 After

17

Jesus said these things, he lifted up
his eyes to the heavens and said, “Father, the
hour has come, glorify your Son so that the
Son will glorify you— 2 just as you gave him

John 17:3

liv

John 17:14

authority over all flesh so that he would give
eternal life to everyone whom you have given
him. 3 This is eternal life: That they know you,
the only true God, and him whom you sent, Jesus
Christ. 4 I glorified you on the earth. I have
finished the work that you have given me to do.
5 Now, Father, glorify me along with yourself
with the glory that I had with you before the
world was made. 6 I revealed your name to
the people whom you gave me from the world.
They were yours, and you gave them to me, and
they have kept your word. 7 Now they know
that everything that you have given me comes
from you, 8 for I have given them all the words
that you gave me. They received them and truly
knew that I came from you, and they believed
that you sent me. 9 I pray for them. I do not pray
for the world but for those whom you have given
me, for they are yours. 10 Everything that is mine
is yours, and yours is mine, and I am glorified
in them. 11 I am no longer in the world, but
these people are in the world, and I am coming
to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name
that you have given me so that they will be one,
just as we are one. 12 While I was with them, I
kept them in your name, which you have given
me. I protected them, and not one of them was
destroyed, except for the son of destruction, so
that the scriptures would be fulfilled. 13 Now I
am coming to you, but I am saying these things
in the world so that they will have my joy fulfilled
in themselves. 14 I have given them your word,

John 17:15

lv

John 18:1

and the world has hated them because they are
not of the world, just as I am not of the world. 15 I
do not ask for you to take them away from the
world, but for you to keep them from the evil
one. 16 They are not of the world, just as I am
not of the world. 17 Set them apart by the truth.
Your word is truth. 18 Just as you sent me into
the world, so I have sent them into the world.
19 For their sakes I have set myself apart, so that
they themselves may also be set apart in truth.
20 I pray not only for these, but also for those
who will believe in me through their word 21 so
that they will all be one, just as you, Father, are
in me, and I am in you. May they also be in us
so that the world will believe that you have sent
me. 22 The glory that you gave me, I have given
to them, so that they will be one, just as we are
one: 23 I in them, and you in me—that they may
be brought to complete unity, so that the world
will know that you sent me, and that you have
loved them just as you loved me. 24 Father, I want
those you have given me to be with me where
I am, and to see my glory, the glory you gave
me because you loved me before the creation
of the world. 25 Righteous Father, the world did
not know you, but I know you; and these know
that you sent me. 26 I made your name known to
them, and I will make it known so that the love
with which you have loved me will be in them,
and I will be in them.”

18

1 After Jesus spoke these words, he went out

John 18:2

lvi

John 18:14

with his disciples to the other side of the Kidron
Valley, where there was a garden into which he
and his disciples entered. 2 Now Judas, who was
going to betray him, also knew the place, for
Jesus often went there with his disciples. 3 Then
Judas, leading a group of soldiers and some
officers from the chief priests and Pharisees,
went there with lanterns, torches, and weapons.
4 Then Jesus, who knew all the things that were
happening to him, went forward and asked
5 They
them, “Who are you looking for?”
answered him, “Jesus of Nazareth.” Jesus said
to them, “I am.” Judas, who betrayed him, was
also standing with the soldiers. 6 So when he said
to them, “I am,” they went backward and fell to
the ground. 7 Then again he asked them, “Who
are you looking for?” Again they said, “Jesus of
Nazareth.” 8 Jesus answered, “I told you that I
am. So if you are looking for me, let these go.”
9 This was in order to fulfill the word that he
said: “Of those whom you have given me, I lost
no one.” 10 Then Simon Peter, who had a sword,
drew it and struck the servant of the high priest
and cut off his right ear. Now the name of the
servant was Malchus. 11 Jesus said to Peter, “Put
the sword back into its sheath. Should I not drink
the cup that the Father has given me?”
12 So the group of soldiers and the captain, and
the officers of the Jews, seized Jesus and tied him
up. 13 They led him first to Annas, for he was
father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest
that year. 14 Now Caiaphas was the one who
had given the advice to the Jews that it would

John 18:15

lvii

John 18:25

be better that one man die for the people.
15 Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did
another disciple. Now that disciple was known
to the high priest, and he entered with Jesus
into the courtyard of the high priest; 16 but Peter
was standing at the door outside. So the other
disciple, who was known to the high priest, went
out and spoke to the female doorkeeper and he
brought Peter in. 17 Then the female servant, the
doorkeeper, said to Peter, “Are you not also one
of the disciples of this man?” He said, “I am
not.” 18 Now the servants and the officers were
standing there, and they had made a charcoal
fire, for it was cold, and they were warming
themselves. Peter was also with them, standing
there and warming himself.
19 The high priest then asked Jesus about his
disciples and his teaching. 20 Jesus answered
him, “I have spoken openly to the world. I was
always teaching in synagogues and in the temple
where all the Jews come together. I said nothing
in secret. 21 Why did you ask me? Ask those
who have heard me about what I said. Look,
these people know what I said.” 22 When Jesus
had said this, one of the officers standing there
struck Jesus and said, “Is that how you answer
the high priest?” 23 Jesus answered him, “If I
spoke wrongly, testify about the wrong, but if
rightly, why do you hit me?” 24 Then Annas sent
him tied up to Caiaphas the high priest.
25 Now Simon Peter was standing and warming
himself. The people then said to him, “Are you
not also one of his disciples?” He denied it and

John 18:26

lviii

John 18:37

said, “I am not.” 26 One of the servants of the
high priest, who was a relative of the man whose
ear Peter had cut off, said, “Did I not see you
in the garden with him?” 27 Peter then denied
again, and immediately the rooster crowed.
28 Then they led Jesus from Caiaphas to the
government headquarters. It was early in the
morning, and they did not enter the government
headquarters so that they would not be defiled
but would eat the Passover. 29 So Pilate went
out to them and said, “What accusation are you
bringing against this man?” 30 They answered
and said to him, “If this man was not an
evildoer, we would not have given him over to
you.” 31 Pilate therefore said to them, “Take
him yourselves, and judge him according to your
law.” The Jews said to him, “It is not lawful for
us to put any man to death.” 32 They said this so
that the word of Jesus would be fulfilled which
he had spoken to indicate by what kind of death
he would die.
33 Then Pilate entered the government headquarters again and called Jesus and he said to
him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” 34 Jesus
answered, “Do you speak from yourself, or
did others speak to you about me?” 35 Pilate
answered, “I am not a Jew, am I? Your own
people and the chief priests gave you over to
me. What did you do?” 36 Jesus answered, “My
kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom
were part of this world, then my servants would
fight so that I would not be given over to the Jews.
But now my kingdom is not from here.” 37 Pilate

John 18:38

lix

John 19:7

then said to him, “Are you a king then?” Jesus
answered, “You say that I am a king. For this
purpose I have been born, and for this purpose
I have come into the world, so that I would bear
witness to the truth. Everyone who belongs to
the truth listens to my voice.” 38 Pilate said to
him, “What is truth?” When he had said this, he
went out again to the Jews and said to them, “I
find no guilt in this man. 39 But you have the
custom that I release one person to you at the
Passover. So do you want me to release the King
of the Jews to you?” 40 Then they cried out again
and said, “Not this man, but Barabbas.” Now
Barabbas was a robber.
1 Then

19

Pilate took Jesus and whipped him.
2 The soldiers weaved a crown of thorns. They
put it on the head of Jesus and dressed him
with a purple garment. 3 They came to him and
said, “Hail, King of the Jews!” and they struck
him. 4 Then Pilate went outside again and said
to them, “See, I am bringing him outside to you
so that you will know that I find no guilt in
him.” 5 So Jesus came out, wearing the crown
of thorns and the purple garment. Pilate said to
them, “Look, here is the man!” 6 When therefore
the chief priests and the officers saw Jesus, they
cried out and said, “Crucify him, crucify him!”
Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and
crucify him, for I find no guilt in him.” 7 The Jews
answered him, “We have a law, and according
to that law he has to die because he claimed to

John 19:8

lx

John 19:19

be the Son of God.” 8 When Pilate heard this
statement, he was even more afraid, 9 and he
entered the government headquarters again and
said to Jesus, “Where do you come from?” But
Jesus gave him no answer. 10 Then Pilate said
to him, “Are you not speaking to me? Do you
not know that I have power to release you, and
power to crucify you?” 11 Jesus answered him,
“You do not have any power over me except
for what has been given to you from above.
Therefore, he who gave me over to you has a
greater sin.” 12 At this answer, Pilate tried to
release him, but the Jews cried out, saying, “If
you release this man, you are not a friend of
Caesar. Everyone who makes himself a king
speaks against Caesar.” 13 When Pilate heard
these words, he brought Jesus out and sat down
in the judgment seat in a place called “The
Pavement,” but in Hebrew, “Gabbatha.” 14 Now
it was the day of preparation for the Passover,
at about the sixth hour. Pilate said to the Jews,
“See, here is your king!” 15 They cried out, “Away
with him, away with him; crucify him!” Pilate
said to them, “Should I crucify your King?” The
chief priests answered, “We have no king but
Caesar.” 16 Then Pilate gave Jesus over to them
to be crucified.
17 Then they took Jesus, and he went out,
carrying the cross for himself, to the place called
“The Place of a Skull,” which in Hebrew is called
“Golgotha.” 18 They crucified Jesus there, and
with him two other men, one on each side, with
Jesus in the middle. 19 Pilate also wrote a sign

John 19:20

lxi

John 19:29

and put it on the cross. There it was written:
JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
20 Many of the Jews read this sign because the
place where Jesus was crucified was near the
city. The sign was written in Hebrew, in Latin,
and in Greek. 21 Then the chief priests of the
Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write, 'The King of
the Jews,' but rather, 'This one said, “I am King
of the Jews.”'” 22 Pilate answered, “What I have
written I have written.”
23 When the soldiers crucified Jesus, they took
his clothes, divided them into four shares, one
for each of them; and also the tunic. Now the
tunic was seamless, woven in one piece from
the top. 24 Then they said to each other, “Let
us not tear it, but instead let us cast lots for it to
decide whose it will be.” This happened so that
the scripture would be fulfilled which said,
“They divided my garments among themselves
and cast lots for my clothing.”
This is what the soldiers did. 25 Now standing
beside Jesus' cross were his mother, his mother's
sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. 26 When Jesus saw his mother and the
disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said
to his mother, “Woman, see, your son!” 27 Then
he said to the disciple, “See, your mother!” From
that hour the disciple took her to his own home.
28 After this, knowing that everything was now
completed and so that the scriptures would be
fulfilled, Jesus said, “I am thirsty.” 29 A container
full of sour wine was placed there, so they put
a sponge full of the sour wine on a hyssop staff

John 19:30

lxii

John 19:40

and lifted it up to his mouth. 30 When Jesus had
taken the sour wine, he said, “It is finished.” He
bowed his head and gave up his spirit.
31 Then the Jews, because it was the day of
preparation, and so that the bodies would not
remain on the cross during the Sabbath (for
that Sabbath was especially important), asked
Pilate to break their legs and to remove them.
32 Then the soldiers came and broke the legs of
the first man and of the second man who had
been crucified with Jesus. 33 When they came
to Jesus, they saw that he was already dead, so
they did not break his legs. 34 However, one of
the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and
immediately blood and water came out. 35 The
one who saw this has testified, and his testimony
is true. He knows that what he said is true so
that you would also believe. 36 For these things
happened in order to fulfill scripture, “Not one
of his bones will be broken.” 37 Again, another
scripture says, “They will look at him whom they
pierced.”
38 After these things, Joseph of Arimathea,
since he was a disciple of Jesus (but secretly
for fear of the Jews), asked Pilate if he could
take away the body of Jesus. Pilate gave him
permission. So Joseph came and took away
his body. 39 Nicodemus also came, he who at
first had come to Jesus by night. He brought a
mixture of myrrh and aloes, about one hundred
litras in weight. 40 So they took the body of Jesus
and wrapped it in linen cloths with the spices,
as was the custom of the Jews to bury bodies.

John 19:41

lxiii

John 20:11

41 Now in the place where he was crucified there

was a garden; and in the garden was a new
tomb in which no person had yet been buried.
42 Because it was the day of preparation for the
Jews and because the tomb was close by, they
laid Jesus in it.

20

1 Now early on the first day of the week, while

it was still dark, Mary Magdalene came to the
tomb and she saw the stone rolled away from the
tomb. 2 So she ran and came to Simon Peter and
to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and she
said to them, “They took away the Lord out from
the tomb, and we do not know where they have
laid him.” 3 Then Peter and the other disciple
went out, and they went to the tomb. 4 They
both ran together, and the other disciple quickly
ran ahead of Peter and arrived at the tomb first.
5 Then stooping down, he saw the linen cloths
lying there, but he did not go inside. 6 Simon
Peter then arrived after him and went into the
tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying there 7 and
the cloth that had been on his head. It was not
lying with the linen cloths but was folded up in a
place by itself. 8 Then the other disciple, the one
who first arrived at the tomb, also went in, and
he saw and believed. 9 For until that time they
still did not know the scripture that he should
rise from the dead. 10 So the disciples went back
home again.
11 But Mary was standing outside the tomb
weeping. As she wept, she stooped down into

John 20:12

lxiv

John 20:22

the tomb. 12 She saw two angels in white sitting,
one at the head, and one at the foot of where
the body of Jesus had lain. 13 They said to her,
“Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to
them, “Because they took away my Lord, and I
do not know where they have put him.” 14 When
she said this, she turned around and saw Jesus
standing there, but she did not know that it was
Jesus. 15 Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are
you weeping? Whom are you looking for?” She
thought that he was the gardener, so she said
to him, “Sir, if you have taken him away, tell
me where you have put him, and I will take
him away.” 16 Jesus said to her, “Mary.” She
turned, and said to him in Hebrew, “Rabboni”
(which means “Teacher”). 17 Jesus said to her,
“Do not touch me, for I have not yet gone up
to the Father, but go to my brothers and say to
them that I will go up to my Father and your
Father, and my God and your God.” 18 Mary
Magdalene came and told the disciples, “I have
seen the Lord,” and that he had said these things
to her.
19 When it was evening, on that day, the first
day of the week, and the doors of where the
disciples were, were closed for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in the middle of them
and said to them, “Peace to you.” 20 After he
said this, he showed them his hands and his
side. The disciples rejoiced when they saw the
Lord. 21 Jesus then said to them again, “Peace to
you. As the Father has sent me, so I am sending
you.” 22 When Jesus had said this, he breathed

John 20:23

lxv

John 21:2

on them and said to them, “Receive the Holy
Spirit. 23 Whoever's sins you forgive, they are
forgiven; whoever's sins you keep back, they are
kept back.”
24 Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus,
was not with them when Jesus came. 25 The other
disciples later said to him, “We have seen the
Lord.” He said to them, “Unless I see in his hands
the mark of the nails, and put my finger into the
mark of the nails, and put my hand into his side,
I will not believe.”
26 After eight days his disciples were inside
again, and Thomas was with them. Jesus came
while the doors were closed, and stood among
them, and said, “Peace to you.” 27 Then he said
to Thomas, “Reach here with your finger and see
my hands. Reach here with your hand and put it
into my side. Do not be unbelieving, but believe.”
28 Thomas answered and said to him, “My Lord
and my God.” 29 Jesus said to him, “Because you
have seen me, you have believed. Blessed are
those who have not seen, and believed.”
30 Now Jesus did many other signs in the
presence of the disciples, signs that have not
been written in this book, 31 but these have been
written so that you would believe that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God, and so that believing,
you would have life in his name.

21

1 After these things Jesus showed himself again

to the disciples at the Sea of Tiberias. This is how
he showed himself: 2 Simon Peter was together

John 21:3

lxvi

John 21:14

with Thomas called Didymus, Nathaniel from
Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two
other disciples of Jesus. 3 Simon Peter said to
them, “I am going fishing.” They said to him,
“We, too, will come with you.” They went and
got into a boat, but they caught nothing during
the whole night. 4 Now, when it was already
early in the morning, Jesus stood on the beach,
but the disciples did not know it was Jesus. 5 So
Jesus said to them, “Young men, do you have
anything to eat?” They answered him, “No.” 6 He
said to them, “Throw your net on the right side
of the boat, and you will find some.” So they
threw their net and were not able to draw it in
because of the large number of fish. 7 Then the
disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It is
the Lord.” When Simon Peter heard that it was
the Lord, he tied up his outer garment (for he
was undressed), and threw himself into the sea.
8 The other disciples came in the boat (for they
were not far from the land, about two hundred
cubits off), and they were pulling the net full of
fish. 9 When they got out upon the land, they
saw a charcoal fire there and fish laid on it, with
bread. 10 Jesus said to them, “Bring some of the
fish that you have just caught.” 11 Simon Peter
then went up and drew the net to land, full of
large fish; 153. There were so many, but the net
was not torn. 12 Jesus said to them, “Come and
eat breakfast.” None of the disciples dared ask
him, “Who are you?” They knew it was the Lord.
13 Jesus came, took the bread, and gave it to them,
and the fish also. 14 This was the third time that

John 21:15

lxvii

John 21:23

Jesus showed himself to the disciples after he had
risen from the dead.
15 After they ate breakfast, Jesus said to Simon
Peter, “Simon son of John, do you love me more
than these?” Peter said to him, “Yes Lord, you
know that I love you.” Jesus said to him, “Feed
my lambs.” 16 He said to him again a second time,
“Simon son of John, do you love me?” Peter said
to him, “Yes Lord, you know that I love you.”
Jesus said to him, “Take care of my sheep.”
17 He said to him a third time, “Simon son of
John, do you love me?” Peter was sad because
Jesus had said to him a third time, “Do you
love me?” He said to him, “Lord, you know
all things, you know that I love you.” Jesus
said to him, “Feed my sheep. 18 Truly, truly, I
say to you, when you were young, you used to
clothe yourself and walk wherever you wanted,
but when you become old, you will stretch out
your hands, and someone else will clothe you
and carry you where you will not want to go.”
19 Now Jesus said this in order to indicate with
what kind of death Peter would glorify God.
After he had said this, he said to Peter, “Follow
me.” 20 Peter turned around and saw the disciple
whom Jesus loved following them, the one who
had also leaned back against the side of Jesus at
the dinner and who had said, “Lord, who is the
one who will betray you?” 21 Peter saw him and
then said to Jesus, “Lord, what will this man do?”
22 Jesus said to him, “If I want him to stay until I
come, what is that to you? Follow me.” 23 So this
statement spread among the brothers, that that

John 21:24

lxviii

John 21:25

disciple would not die. Yet Jesus did not say to
Peter that the other disciple would not die, but,
“If I want him to stay until I come, what is that
to you?”
24 This is the disciple who testifies about these
things, and who wrote these things, and we know
that his testimony is true. 25 There are also many
other things that Jesus did. If each one were
written down, I suppose that even the world
itself could not contain the books that would be
written.

lxix

Unlocked Literal Bible

The Holy Bible in English, Unlocked Literal Bible
translation
copyright © 2017 Door43 World Missions Community
Language: English
Translation by: Door43 World Missions Community
Contributor: 'Alrick G. Headley, M.Div., Th.M.', 'Adam W. Nagelvoort,
M.Div. Academic Ministries, Columbia International University', 'Dave
Statezni, BA Orig langs., M.Div. Fuller Theological Seminary', 'Bram van
den Heuvel, M.A.', 'C. Harry Harriss, M.Div.', 'David Trombold, M. Div.',
'Elizabeth Oakes, BA in Religious Studies, Linguistics', 'George "Drew"
Curley, M.Div., PhD, Professor of Biblical Languages', Hendrik "Henry" de
Vries, 'Henry Whitney, BA Linguistics', 'Jesse Griffin, BA Biblical Studies,
MA Biblical Languages', 'James N. Pohlig, M.Div., MA in Linguistics,
D. Litt. in Biblical Languages', 'Larry T Brooks, M.Div., Assemblies of
God Theological Seminary', 'Larry Sallee, D.Min.', 'Paul M Fahnestock,
M.Div. Reformed Theological Seminary, D. Min. Pittsburgh Theological
Seminary', 'Perry Oakes, PhD in Old Testament, MA in Linguistics', 'Peter
Smircich, BA Philosophy', 'Susan Quigley, MA in Linguistics', 'Thomas
Warren, M.Div., Trinity Evangelical Divinity School, D.Min, Reformed
Theological Seminary', 'Timothy Neu, Ph.D. Biblical Studies', 'Ward Pyles,
M.Div., Western Baptist Theological Seminary', David Trombold, Dean
Ropp, Gene Mullen, James Vigen, Leonard Smith, Nicholas Alsop, Michael
Francis
This is an open-licensed update of the ASV, intended to provide a 'formcentric' understanding of the Bible. It increases the translator's understanding of the lexical and grammatical composition of the underlying
text by adhering closely to the word order and structure of the originals.
This translation is made available to you under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Share-Alike license 4.0.
You have permission to share and redistribute this Bible translation in
any format and to make reasonable revisions and adaptations of this
translation, provided that:
You include the above copyright and source information.
If you make any changes to the text, you must indicate that you did
so in a way that makes it clear that the original licensor is not
necessarily endorsing your changes.

lxx
If you redistribute this text, you must distribute your contributions
under the same license as the original.
Pictures included with Scriptures and other documents on this site are
licensed just for use with those Scriptures and documents. For other uses,
please contact the respective copyright owners.
Note that in addition to the rules above, revising and adapting God's Word
involves a great responsibility to be true to God's Word. See Revelation
22:18-19.
2020-12-04
PDF generated using Haiola and XeLaTeX on 3 Mar 2023 from source files
dated 22 Nov 2019
d2521e10-6da3-5d98-a991-da7d3515afd5

