Luke 1:1

i

Luke 1:11

Luke
1 Many

have taken on the work of putting
together an account of the things that have
been fulfilled among us, 2 just as they were
passed down to us by those who from the first
were eyewitnesses and servants of the word.
3 So it seemed good to me also, because I
have accurately investigated everything from the
beginning, to write an orderly account for you,
most excellent Theophilus, 4 so that you might
know the certainty of the things you have been
taught.
5 In the days of Herod, king of Judea, there
was a certain priest named Zechariah, from
the division of Abijah. His wife was from the
daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
6 They were both righteous before God, obeying
all the commandments and ordinances of the
Lord. 7 But they had no child, because Elizabeth
was barren, and they were both very old by this
time.
8 Now it came about that Zechariah was in
God's presence, carrying out the priestly duties
in the order of his division. 9 According to the
customary way of choosing which priest would
serve, he had been chosen by lot to enter into
the temple of the Lord to burn incense. 10 The
whole crowd of people was praying outside at
the hour when the incense was burned. 11 Now
an angel of the Lord appeared to him and stood

Luke 1:12

ii

Luke 1:23

at the right side of the incense altar. 12 When
Zechariah saw him, he was terrified and fear fell
on him. 13 But the angel said to him, “Do not
be afraid, Zechariah, because your prayer has
been heard. Your wife Elizabeth will bear you
a son. You will call his name John. 14 You will
have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at
his birth. 15 For he will be great in the sight of
the Lord. He must never drink wine or strong
drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit
from his mother's womb. 16 Many of the people
of Israel will be turned to the Lord their God.
17 He will go before the face of the Lord in the
spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of
the fathers to the children and the disobedient to
the wisdom of the righteous—to make ready for
the Lord a people prepared for him.”
18 Zechariah said to the angel, “How can I
know this? For I am an old man and my wife is
very old.” 19 The angel answered and said to him,
“I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God.
I was sent to speak to you, to bring you this good
news. 20 Behold! You will be silent, unable to
speak, until the day these things take place. This
is because you did not believe my words, which
will be fulfilled at the right time.” 21 Now the
people were waiting for Zechariah. They were
surprised that he was spending so much time in
the temple. 22 But when he came out, he could
not speak to them. They realized that he had
seen a vision while he was in the temple. He kept
on making signs to them and remained silent.
23 It came about that when the days of his service

Luke 1:24

iii

Luke 1:38

were over, he went to his house.
24 After these days, his wife Elizabeth conceived and for five months she kept herself
hidden. She said, 25 “This is what the Lord has
done for me when he looked at me with favor in
order to take away my shame before people.”
26 In the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was
sent from God to a city in Galilee named
Nazareth, 27 to a virgin engaged to a man whose
name was Joseph. He belonged to the house of
David, and the virgin's name was Mary. 28 He
came to her and said, “Greetings, you who are
highly favored! The Lord is with you.” 29 But
she was very confused by his words and she
wondered what kind of greeting this could be.
30 The angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary,
for you have found favor with God. 31 See, you
will conceive in your womb and bear a son. You
will call his name 'Jesus.' 32 He will be great
and will be called the Son of the Most High.
The Lord God will give him the throne of his
ancestor David. 33 He will reign over the house
of Jacob forever, and there will be no end to
his kingdom.” 34 Mary said to the angel, “How
will this happen, since I have not slept with any
man?” 35 The angel answered and said to her,
“The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the
power of the Most High will come over you. So
the holy one to be born will be called the Son
of God. 36 See, your relative Elizabeth has also
conceived a son in her old age. This is the sixth
month for her, she who was called barren. 37 For
nothing will be impossible for God.” 38 Mary

Luke 1:39

iv

Luke 1:51

said, “See, I am the female servant of the Lord.
Let it be for me according to your message.”
Then the angel left her.
39 Then Mary arose in those days and quickly
went into the hill country, to a city in Judea.
40 She went into the house of Zechariah and
greeted Elizabeth. 41 Now it happened that when
Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, the baby in her
womb jumped, and Elizabeth was filled with the
Holy Spirit. 42 She raised her voice and said
loudly, “Blessed are you among women, and
blessed is the fruit of your womb. 43 Why has
it happened to me that the mother of my Lord
should come to me? 44 For see, when the sound
of your greeting came to my ears, the baby in
my womb jumped for joy. 45 Blessed is she who
believed that there would be a fulfillment of the
things that were told her from the Lord.” 46 Mary
said,
“My soul praises the Lord,
47 and my spirit has rejoiced in God my savior.
48 For he has looked at the low condition of his
female servant.
For see, from now on all generations will call me
blessed.
49 For he who is mighty has done great things for
me,
and his name is holy.
50 His mercy lasts from generation to generation
for those who fear him.
51 He has displayed strength with his arm;
he has scattered those who were proud about the
thoughts of their hearts.

Luke 1:52

v

Luke 1:66

He has thrown down princes from their
thrones
and he has raised up those of low condition.
53 He has filled the hungry with good things,
but the rich he has sent away empty.
54 He has given help to Israel his servant,
so as to remember to show mercy
55 (as he said to our fathers) to Abraham and his
descendants forever.”
56 Mary stayed with Elizabeth about three
months and then returned to her house.
57 Now the time had come for Elizabeth to
deliver her baby and she gave birth to a son.
58 Her neighbors and her relatives heard that the
Lord had shown his great mercy to her, and they
rejoiced with her.
59 Now it happened on the eighth day that they
came to circumcise the child. They would have
called him “Zechariah,” after the name of his
father. 60 But his mother answered and said,
“No. He will be called John.” 61 They said to
her, “There is no one among your relatives who
is called by this name.” 62 They made signs to
his father as to how he wanted him to be named.
63 His father asked for a writing tablet and wrote,
“His name is John.” They all were astonished at
this. 64 Immediately his mouth was opened and
his tongue was freed. He spoke and praised God.
65 Fear came on all who lived around them. All
these matters were spread throughout all the hill
country of Judea. 66 All who heard them stored
them in their hearts, saying, “What then will this
child become?” For the hand of the Lord was
with him.
52

Luke 1:67

vi

Luke 1:79

67 His father Zechariah was filled with the Holy

Spirit and prophesied, saying,
68 “Praised be the Lord, the God of Israel,
for he has come to help and he has accomplished
redemption for his people.
69 He has raised up a horn of salvation for us
in the house of his servant David
70 (as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets
from long ago),
71 salvation from our enemies
and from the hand of all who hate us.
72 He will do this to show mercy to our fathers
and to remember his holy covenant,
73 the oath that he spoke to Abraham our father.
74 He swore to grant to us that we, having been
delivered out of the hand of our enemies,
would serve him without fear,
75 in holiness and righteousness before him all
our days.
76 Yes, and you, child, will be called a prophet of
the Most High,
for you will go before the face of the Lord to
prepare his paths,
to prepare people for his coming,
77 to give knowledge of salvation to his people
by the forgiveness of their sins.
78 This will happen because of the tender mercy
of our God,
because of which the sunrise from on high will
come to help us,
79 to shine on those who sit in darkness and in
the shadow of death.
He will do this to guide our feet into the path of
peace.”

Luke 1:80

vii

Luke 2:12

80 Now the child grew and became strong in

spirit, and he was in the wilderness until the day
of his public appearance to Israel.

2

1 Now in those days, it came about that Caesar

Augustus sent out a decree ordering that a census
be taken of all the people living in the world.
2 This was the first census made while Quirinius
was governor of Syria. 3 So everyone went to
his own city to be registered for the census.
4 Joseph also went up from Galilee, from the city
of Nazareth, to Judea, to the city of David which
is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house
and family line of David. 5 He went there to
register along with Mary, who was engaged to
him and was pregnant. 6 Now it came about that
while they were there, the time came for her
to deliver her baby. 7 She gave birth to a son,
her firstborn child, and she wrapped him in long
strips of cloth and laid him in a manger, because
there was no room for them in the inn.
8 There were shepherds in that region who
were staying in the fields, guarding their flock at
night. 9 An angel of the Lord appeared to them,
and the glory of the Lord shone around them,
and they were filled with great fear. 10 Then the
angel said to them, “Do not be afraid, because
I bring you the good news that will bring great
joy to all the people. 11 Today a savior was born
for you in the city of David! He is Christ the
Lord! 12 This is the sign that will be given to you:
You will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth

Luke 2:13

viii

Luke 2:23

and lying in a manger.” 13 Suddenly there was
together with the angel a great, heavenly army
praising God and saying,
14 “Glory to God in the highest,
and may there be peace on earth among people
with whom he is pleased.”
15 It came about that when the angels had gone
away from them into heaven, the shepherds said
to each other, “Let us now go to Bethlehem, and
see this thing that has happened, which the Lord
has made known to us.” 16 They hurried there
and found Mary and Joseph, and saw the baby
lying in the manger. 17 After they had seen him,
they made known what had been said to them
about this child. 18 All who heard it were amazed
at what was spoken to them by the shepherds.
19 But Mary kept thinking about all the things she
had heard, treasuring them in her heart. 20 The
shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God
for everything that they had heard and seen, just
as it had been spoken to them.
21 When it was the end of the eighth day, when
he was circumcised, he was named Jesus, the
name he had been given by the angel before he
was conceived in the womb.
22 When the required number of days for their
purification had passed, according to the law of
Moses, Joseph and Mary * brought him up to
the temple in Jerusalem to present him to the
Lord. 23 As it is written in the law of the Lord,
* 2:22

The proper names Joseph and Mary were not in the
original text, and are supplied for the reader from the third
person plural verb.

Luke 2:24

ix

Luke 2:36

“Every male who opens the womb will be set
apart to the Lord.” 24 So they offered a sacrifice
according to what was said in the law of the
Lord, “a pair of doves or two young pigeons.”
25 Behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose
name was Simeon, and this man was righteous
and devout. He was looking for the consolation
of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him. 26 It
had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that
he would not see death before he had seen the
Lord's Christ. 27 Led by the Spirit, Simeon came
into the temple. When the parents brought in
the infant Jesus, to do for him according to the
custom of the law, 28 he took him into his arms
and praised God and he said,
29 “Now let your servant depart in peace, Lord,
according to your word.
30 For my eyes have seen your salvation,
31 which you have prepared in the presence of
all peoples:
32 A light for revelation to the Gentiles and glory
to your people Israel.”
33 His father and mother † were amazed at
what was said about him. 34 Simeon blessed
them and said to Mary his mother, “Behold, this
child is appointed for the downfall and rising up
of many people in Israel and for a sign that is
rejected— 35 and a sword will pierce your own
soul—so that the thoughts of many hearts may
be revealed.” 36 A prophetess named Anna was
† 2:33 Some ancient copies add to the text the name of his father,

Joseph ; and some omit the mention of the mother. The most
reliable copies have his father and mother .

Luke 2:37

x

Luke 2:47

there. She was the daughter of Phanuel from
the tribe of Asher. She was very old. She had
lived with her husband for seven years after
her virginity, 37 and was a widow for eightyfour years. She never left the temple but was
serving with fastings and prayers, night and day.
38 At that very hour she came near to them and
began giving thanks to God and she spoke about
the child to everyone who had been waiting for
the redemption of Jerusalem. 39 When they had
finished everything they were required to do
according to the law of the Lord, they returned
to Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth.
40 The child grew and became strong, increasing in wisdom, and the grace of God was upon
him.
41 His parents went every year to Jerusalem
for the Festival of the Passover. 42 When he
was twelve years old, they again went up at
the customary time for the feast. 43 After they
had stayed the full number of days for the feast,
they began to return home. But the boy Jesus
stayed behind in Jerusalem and his parents did
not know it. 44 They assumed that he was
with the group that was traveling with them,
so they traveled a day's journey. Then they
started looking for him among their relatives
and friends. 45 When they did not find him,
they returned to Jerusalem and started looking
for him there. 46 It came about that after three
days, they found him in the temple, sitting in
the middle of the teachers, listening to them
and asking them questions. 47 All who heard

Luke 2:48

xi

Luke 3:4

him were amazed at his understanding and his
answers. 48 When they saw him, they were
astonished. His mother said to him, “Son, why
have you treated us this way? Listen, your father
and I have been anxiously searching for you.”
49 He said to them, “Why were you searching
for me? Did you not know that I had to be
about my Father's business? ‡ 50 But they
did not understand what he meant by those
words. 51 Then he went back home with them to
Nazareth and was obedient to them. His mother
treasured all these things in her heart.
52 But Jesus continued to grow in wisdom and
stature, and increased in favor with God and
people.

3

1 In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius

Caesar—while Pontius Pilate was governor of
Judea, Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, his brother
Philip was tetrarch of the region of Ituraea
and Trachonitis, and Lysanias was tetrarch of
Abilene, 2 during the high priesthood of Annas
and Caiaphas—the word of God came to John
son of Zechariah in the wilderness. 3 He went
into all the region around the Jordan, preaching
a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of
sins. 4 As it is written in the book of the words
of Isaiah the prophet,
“A voice of one calling out in the wilderness,
'Make ready the way of the Lord,
‡ 2:49 Some scholars translate “about my Father's business” as
in my Father's house .

Luke 3:5

xii

Luke 3:15

make his paths straight.
5 Every valley will be filled,
and every mountain and hill will be made low,
and the crooked roads will be made straight,
and the uneven places will be built into roads,
6 and all flesh will see the salvation of God.'”
7 So John said to the crowds who were coming
out to be baptized by him, “You offspring of
vipers! Who warned you to run away from the
wrath that is coming? 8 Therefore, produce fruits
that are worthy of repentance, and do not begin
to say within yourselves, 'We have Abraham for
our father,' for I tell you that God is able to
raise up children for Abraham from these stones.
9 Even now the ax is set against the root of
the trees. So every tree that does not produce
good fruit is chopped down and thrown into the
fire.” 10 Then the crowds kept asking him, saying,
“What then are we to do?” 11 He answered and
said to them, “If someone has two tunics, he
should share it with a person who has none, and
the one having food should do the same.” 12 Tax
collectors also came to be baptized, and they said
to him, “Teacher, what must we do?” 13 He said
to them, “Do not collect more money than you
have been ordered to collect.” 14 Some soldiers
also asked him, saying, “What about us? What
must we do?” He said to them, “Do not take
money from anyone by force, and do not accuse
anyone falsely. Be content with your wages.”
15 Now as the people were eagerly expecting
the Christ to come, everyone was wondering in
their hearts concerning John, whether he might

Luke 3:16

xiii

Luke 3:27

be the Christ. 16 John answered by saying to them
all, “As for me, I baptize you with water, but
someone is coming who is more powerful than I,
and I am not worthy even to untie the strap of his
sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit
and with fire. 17 His winnowing fork is in his
hand to thoroughly clear off his threshing floor
and to gather the wheat into his storehouse. But
he will burn up the chaff with fire that can never
be put out.”
18 With many other exhortations also, John
preached good news to the people. 19 When
Herod the tetrarch had been reproved for marrying his brother's wife Herodias, and for all
the other evil things that Herod had done, 20 he
added this to them all, that he locked John up in
prison.
21 Now it came about, when all the people were
baptized, Jesus also was baptized, and while he
was praying, the heavens opened, 22 and the Holy
Spirit in bodily form came down on him like a
dove, and a voice came from heaven, “You are
my Son, whom I love. I am pleased with you.”
23 When Jesus began his ministry, he was about
thirty years of age. He was the son (as it was
assumed) of Joseph, the son of Heli, 24 the son
of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi,
the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph. 25 Joseph
was the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the
son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
26 the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the
son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda.
27 Joda was the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa,

Luke 3:28

xiv

Luke 4:4

the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Salathiel, the
son of Neri, 28 the son of Melchi, the son of Addi,
the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son
of Er, 29 the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the
son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi.
30 Levi was the son of Simeon, the son of Judah,
the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of
Eliakim, 31 the son of Melea, the son of Menna,
the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of
David, 32 the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son
of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon.
33 Nahshon was the son of Amminadab, the son
of Admin, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron,
the son of Perez, the son of Judah, 34 the son
of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham,
the son of Terah, the son of Nahor, 35 the son of
Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son
of Eber, the son of Shelah. 36 Shelah was the son
of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem,
the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, 37 the son of
Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared,
the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan, 38 the
son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the
son of God.
1 Then

4

Jesus, being full of the Holy Spirit,
returned from the Jordan River, and was led by
the Spirit in the wilderness, 2 where for forty
days he was tempted by the devil. He ate nothing
during those days, and at the end of that time
he was hungry. 3 The devil said to him, “If
you are the Son of God, command this stone
to become bread.” 4 Jesus answered him, “It

Luke 4:5

xv

Luke 4:17

is written, 'Man does not live on bread alone.'”
5 Then the devil led Jesus up and showed him
all the kingdoms of the world in an instant of
time. 6 The devil said to him, “I will give to
you all this authority and all their splendor, for
they have been given to me, and I can give it to
anyone I want. 7 So then, if you will bow down
and worship me, it will be yours.” 8 But Jesus
answered and said to him, “It is written, 'You
will worship the Lord your God, and you will
serve only him.'” 9 Then the devil led Jesus to
Jerusalem and put him on the very highest point
of the temple building, and said to him, “If you
are the Son of God, throw yourself down from
here. 10 For it is written,
'He will give orders to his angels regarding you,
to protect you,'
11 and, 'They will lift you up in their hands,
so that you will not strike your foot against a
stone.'”
12 Answering him, Jesus said, “It is said, 'Do not
put the Lord your God to the test.'”
13 When the devil had finished testing Jesus, he
went away and left him until another time.
14 Then Jesus returned to Galilee in the
power of the Spirit, and news about him
spread throughout the entire surrounding region. 15 Then he began to teach in their synagogues and he was praised by all.
16 He came into Nazareth, where he had been
raised, and as was his custom, he entered the
synagogue on the Sabbath day and he stood up
to read aloud. 17 The scroll of the prophet Isaiah

Luke 4:18

xvi

Luke 4:27

was handed to him. He opened the scroll and
found the place where it was written,
18 “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he anointed me to tell good news to the
poor.
He has sent me to proclaim freedom to the
captives,
and recovery of sight to the blind,
to set free those who are oppressed,
19 to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor.”
20 Then he rolled up the scroll, gave it back
to the attendant, and sat down. The eyes of
all in the synagogue were fixed on him. 21 He
began to speak to them, “Today this scripture
has been fulfilled in your hearing.” 22 Everyone
there spoke well of him and they were amazed
at the gracious words which were coming out of
his mouth, and they asked, “Is this not the son
of Joseph?” 23 He said to them, “Surely you will
say this proverb to me, 'Doctor, heal yourself.
Whatever we heard that you did in Capernaum,
do the same in your hometown.'” 24 But he said,
“Truly I say to you, no prophet is received in
his own hometown. 25 But in truth I tell you
that there were many widows in Israel during
the time of Elijah, when the sky was shut up for
three years and six months, and a great famine
came upon all the land. 26 But Elijah was sent to
none of them, but only to Zarephath in Sidon, to a
widow living there. 27 There were many lepers in
Israel during the time of Elisha the prophet, but
none of them were healed except Naaman the

Luke 4:28

xvii

Luke 4:39

Syrian.” 28 All the people in the synagogue were
filled with rage when they heard these things.
29 They got up, forced him out of the town, and
led him to the cliff of the hill on which their town
was built, so they might throw him off the cliff.
30 But he passed through the middle of them and
he went to another place.
31 Then he went down to Capernaum, a city
in Galilee, and he began to teach them on the
Sabbath. 32 They were astonished at his teaching,
because he spoke with authority. 33 Now in the
synagogue there was a man who had the spirit
of an unclean demon, and he cried out with
a loud voice, 34 “Ah! What do we have to do
with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to
destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One
of God!” 35 Jesus rebuked the demon, saying,
“Do not speak! Come out of him!” When the
demon had thrown the man down in the middle
of them, he came out of him, and did not harm
him in any way. 36 All the people were very
amazed, and they kept talking about it with one
another. They said, “What kind of words are
these? He commands the unclean spirits with
authority and power and they come out.” 37 So
news about him began to spread into every part
of the surrounding region.
38 Then Jesus left the synagogue and entered
into the house of Simon. Now Simon's motherin-law was suffering with a high fever, and
they pleaded with him on her behalf. 39 So he
stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left
her. Immediately she got up and started serving

Luke 4:40

xviii

Luke 5:4

them.
40 When the sun was setting, people brought to
Jesus everyone who was sick with various kinds
of diseases. He laid his hands on every one of
them and healed them. 41 Demons also came
out from many of them, crying out and saying,
“You are the Son of God!” Jesus rebuked the
demons and would not let them speak, because
they knew that he was the Christ.
42 When daybreak came, he went out into a
solitary place. Crowds of people were looking for
him and came to the place where he was. They
tried to keep him from going away from them.
43 But he said to them, “I must also preach the
good news about the kingdom of God to many
other cities, because this is the reason I was sent
here.”
44 Then he continued to preach in the synagogues throughout Judea.
1 Now

5

it happened, while the people were
crowding around Jesus and listening to the word
of God, that he was standing by the lake of
Gennesaret. 2 He saw two boats pulled up by
the edge of the lake. The fishermen had gotten
out of them and were washing their nets. 3 Jesus
got into one of the boats, which was Simon's,
and asked him to put it out in the water a short
distance from the land. Then he sat down and
taught the people out of the boat. 4 When he
had finished speaking, he said to Simon, “Take
the boat out into the deeper water and let down

Luke 5:5

xix

Luke 5:15

your nets for a catch.” 5 Simon answered and
said, “Master, we worked all night, and caught
nothing, but at your word, I will let down the
nets.” 6 When they had done this, they gathered
a very large number of fish, and their nets were
breaking. 7 So they motioned to their partners
in the other boat that they should come and
help them. They came and filled both the boats,
so that they began to sink. 8 But Simon Peter,
when he saw it, fell down at Jesus' knees, saying,
“Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord.”
9 For he was amazed, and all who were with him,
at the catch of fish which they had taken. 10 This
included James and John, sons of Zebedee, who
were partners with Simon. Jesus said to Simon,
“Do not be afraid, because from now on you will
catch men.” 11 When they had brought their
boats to land, they left everything and followed
him.
12 It came about that while he was in one of
the cities, a man full of leprosy was there. When
he saw Jesus, he fell on his face and begged
him, saying, “Lord, if you are willing, you can
make me clean.” 13 Then Jesus reached out his
hand and touched him, saying, “I am willing. Be
clean.” Immediately the leprosy left him. 14 He
instructed him to tell no one, but told him, “Go
on your way, and show yourself to the priest and
offer a sacrifice for your cleansing, according
to what Moses commanded, for a testimony to
them.” 15 But the report about him spread
even farther, and large crowds of people came
together to hear him teach and to be healed of

Luke 5:16

xx

Luke 5:26

their sicknesses. 16 But he often withdrew into
the deserted places and prayed.
17 It

came about on one of those days that
he was teaching, and there were Pharisees and
teachers of the law sitting there who had come
from many different villages in the regions of
Galilee and Judea, and also from the town of
Jerusalem. The power of the Lord was with him
to heal. 18 Now some men came, carrying on a
mat a man that was paralyzed, and they looked
for a way to bring him inside in order to lay him
down in front of Jesus. 19 They could not find a
way to bring him in because of the crowd, so they
went up to the housetop and let the man down
through the tiles, on his mat, into the midst of
the people, right in front of Jesus. 20 Seeing their
faith, Jesus said, “Man, your sins are forgiven
you.” 21 The scribes and the Pharisees began to
question this, saying, “Who is this who speaks
blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God
alone?” 22 But Jesus, perceiving what they were
thinking, answered and said to them, “Why are
you questioning this in your hearts? 23 Which is
easier to say, 'Your sins are forgiven you' or to
say 'Get up and walk?' 24 But that you may know
that the Son of Man has authority on earth to
forgive sins,”—he said to the paralysed man—”I
tell you, get up, pick up your mat and go to your
house.” 25 Immediately he got up in front of them
and picked up the mat on which he was lying.
Then he went away to his house, glorifying God.
26 Everyone was amazed and they glorified God.

Luke 5:27

xxi

Luke 5:37

They were filled with fear, saying, “We have seen
extraordinary things today.”
27 After these things happened, Jesus went out
from there and saw a tax collector named Levi
sitting at the tax collector's tent. He said to him,
“Follow me.” 28 So Levi got up and followed him,
leaving everything behind.
29 Then Levi gave a big banquet in his house
for Jesus. There were many tax collectors there
and other people who were reclining at the table
and eating with them. 30 But the Pharisees and
their scribes were complaining to his disciples,
saying, “Why do you eat and drink with tax
collectors and other sinful people?” 31 Jesus
answered them, “People who are well do not
need a physician; only those who are sick. 32 I did
not come to call righteous people to repentance,
but to call sinners to repentance.”
33 They said to him, “The disciples of John often
fast and pray, and the disciples of the Pharisees
do the same. But your disciples eat and drink.”
34 Jesus said to them, “Can anyone make the
wedding attendants of the bridegroom fast while
the bridegroom is still with them? 35 But the
days will come when the bridegroom will be
taken away from them, then in those days they
will fast.” 36 Then Jesus also spoke a parable to
them. “No one tears a piece of cloth from a new
garment and uses it to mend an old garment. If
he did that, he would tear the new garment, and
the piece of cloth from the new garment would
not fit with the cloth of the old garment. 37 No

Luke 5:38

xxii

Luke 6:8

one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he
does that, the new wine would burst the skins,
and the wine would be spilled, and the wineskins
would be destroyed. 38 But new wine must be put
into fresh wineskins. 39 No one after drinking
old wine wants the new, for he says, 'The old is
better.'”

6

1 Now it happened on a Sabbath that Jesus was

going through the grainfields, and his disciples
were picking the heads of grain, rubbing them
between their hands, and eating the grain. 2 But
some of the Pharisees said, “Why are you doing
something that is not lawful to do on the Sabbath
day?” 3 Answering them, Jesus said, “Have you
not even read what David did when he was
hungry, he and the men who were with him?
4 He went into the house of God, and took the
bread of the presence and ate some of it, and also
gave some to the men who were with him to eat,
even though it was only lawful for the priests to
eat it.” 5 Then he said to them, “The Son of Man
is Lord of the Sabbath.”
6 It happened on another Sabbath that he
went into the synagogue and taught the people
there. A man was there whose right hand was
withered. 7 The scribes and the Pharisees were
watching him closely to see whether he would
heal someone on the Sabbath, so that they might
find a reason to accuse him. 8 But he knew what
they were thinking and he said to the man whose
hand was withered, “Get up, and stand here in
the middle of everyone.” So the man got up and

Luke 6:9

xxiii

Luke 6:21

stood there. 9 Jesus said to them, “I ask you, is it
lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm,
to save a life or to destroy it?” 10 Then he looked
around at them all and said to the man, “Stretch
out your hand.” He did so, and his hand was
restored. 11 But they were filled with anger and
they talked to each other about what they might
do to Jesus.
12 It happened in those days that he went
out to the mountain to pray. He continued all
night in prayer to God. 13 When it was day,
he called his disciples to him, and he chose
twelve of them, whom he also named apostles.
14 The names of the apostles were Simon (whom
he also named Peter) and his brother Andrew,
James, John, Philip, Bartholomew, 15 Matthew,
Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Simon who was
called the Zealot, 16 Judas son of James, and
Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor. 17 Then
Jesus came down the mountain with them and
stood on a level place with a large crowd of his
disciples and a large number of the people from
Judea and Jerusalem and the seacoast of Tyre
and Sidon. 18 They had come to listen to him and
to be healed of their diseases. People who were
troubled with unclean spirits were also healed.
19 Everyone in the crowd kept trying to touch him
because power to heal was coming out from him,
and he healed them all.
20 Then he looked at his disciples, and said,
“Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the
kingdom of God. 21 Blessed are you who hunger
now, for you will be filled. Blessed are you who

Luke 6:22

xxiv

Luke 6:34

weep now, for you will laugh. 22 Blessed are you
when people hate you, and when they exclude
you and insult you and reject your name as evil,
because of the Son of Man. 23 Rejoice in that day
and leap for joy, because you will surely have
a great reward in heaven, for their ancestors
treated the prophets in the same way. 24 But
woe to you who are rich, for you have already
received your comfort. 25 Woe to you who are
full now, for you will be hungry later. Woe to you
who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep
later. 26 Woe to you when all men speak well of
you, for that is how their ancestors treated the
false prophets.
27 But I say to you who are listening, love your

enemies and do good to those who hate you.
28 Bless those who curse you and pray for those
who mistreat you. 29 To him who strikes you
on the one cheek, offer him also the other. If
someone takes away your coat, do not withhold
your tunic either. 30 Give to everyone who asks
you. If someone takes away something that
belongs to you, do not ask him to give it back
to you. 31 As you want people to do to you,
you should do the same to them. 32 If you only
love people who love you, what credit is that
to you? For even sinners love those who love
them. 33 If you do good only to people who do
good to you, what credit is that to you? For
even sinners do the same. 34 If you only lend
to people from whom you expect to be repaid,
what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend

Luke 6:35

xxv

Luke 6:44

to sinners, to get back the same amount. 35 But
love your enemies and do good to them. Lend,
expecting nothing in return, and your reward
will be great, and you will be sons of the Most
High, for he himself is kind toward unthankful
and evil people. 36 Be merciful, just as your
Father is merciful. 37 Do not judge, and you
will not be judged. Do not condemn, and you
will not be condemned. Forgive others, and you
will be forgiven. 38 Give, and it will be given to
you. A generous amount—pressed down, shaken
together and spilling over—will pour into your
lap. For with the measure you use, it will be
measured back to you.”
39 Then he also told them a parable.

“Can a
blind person guide another blind person? If he
did, they would both fall into a pit, would they
not? 40 A disciple is not greater than his teacher,
but everyone when he is fully trained will be like
his teacher. 41 Why do you look at the tiny piece
of straw that is in your brother's eye, but you
do not notice the log that is in your own eye?
42 How can you say to your brother, 'Brother, let
me take out the piece of straw that is in your eye,'
when you yourself do not even see the log that is
in your own eye? You hypocrite! First take the
log out of your own eye, and then you will see
clearly to take out the piece of straw that is in
your brother's eye. 43 For there is no good tree
that produces rotten fruit, nor is there a rotten
tree that produces good fruit. 44 For each tree
is known by the kind of fruit it produces. For

Luke 6:45

xxvi

Luke 7:4

people do not gather figs from a thornbush, nor
do they gather grapes from a briar bush. 45 The
good man from the good treasure of his heart
produces what is good, and the evil man from
the evil treasure of his heart produces what is
evil. For out of the abundance of the heart his
mouth speaks.
46 Why do you call me, 'Lord, Lord,' and yet
you do not obey the things that I say? 47 Every
person who comes to me and hears my words
and obeys them, I will tell you what he is like.
48 He is like a man building a house, who dug
down deep in the ground and built the house's
foundation on solid rock. When a flood came,
the torrent of water flowed against that house,
but could not shake it, because it had been well
built. 49 But the person who hears my words and
does not obey them, he is like a man who built a
house on top of the ground without a foundation.
When the torrent of water flowed against that
house, it immediately collapsed, and the ruin of
that house was complete.”

7

1 After Jesus had finished everything he was

saying in the hearing of the people, he entered
Capernaum.
2 Now a centurion had a slave who was highly
regarded by him, and he was sick and about to
die. 3 When the centurion heard about Jesus,
he sent to him elders of the Jews, asking him
to come and heal his servant. 4 When they
had come to Jesus, they asked him earnestly,

Luke 7:5

xxvii

Luke 7:15

saying, “He is worthy to have you do this for
him, 5 because he loves our nation, and he is
the one who built the synagogue for us.” 6 So
Jesus continued on his way with them. But when
he was not far from the house, the centurion
sent friends to say to him, “Lord, do not trouble
yourself, because I am not worthy for you to
come under my roof. 7 For this reason I did not
even consider myself worthy to come to you, but
just say a word and my servant will be healed.
8 For I also am a man who is under authority,
with soldiers under me. I say to this one, 'Go,'
and he goes, and to another one, 'Come,' and
he comes, and to my servant, 'Do this,' and he
does it.” 9 When Jesus heard this, he was amazed
at him, and turning to the crowd following him
said, “I say to you, not even in Israel have I found
such faith.” 10 When those who had been sent
returned to the house, they found the servant
was well.
11 Soon after that, Jesus went to a town called
Nain, and his disciples and a great crowd went
with him. 12 As he came near to the gate of the
town, behold, a man who had died was being
carried out, the only son of his mother (who was
a widow), and a rather large crowd from the
town was with her. 13 When the Lord saw her,
he was deeply moved with compassion for her
and said to her, “Do not cry.” 14 Then he went
up and touched the wooden frame on which they
carried the body, and those carrying it stood still.
He said, “Young man, I say to you, arise.” 15 The
dead man sat up and began to speak, and Jesus

Luke 7:16

xxviii

Luke 7:26

gave him to his mother. 16 Then fear overcame
all of them, and they kept praising God, saying,
“A great prophet has been raised among us”
and “God has looked upon his people.” 17 This
news about Jesus spread throughout the whole
of Judea and all the neighboring regions.
18 John's disciples told him about all these
things. 19 Then John called two of his disciples
and sent them to the Lord to say, “Are you
the one who is to come, or should we look for
another?” 20 When they had come near to Jesus,
the men said, “John the Baptist has sent us to you
to say, 'Are you the one who is coming, or should
we look for another?'” 21 In that hour he healed
many people from sicknesses and afflictions and
from evil spirits, and to many blind people he
gave sight. 22 Jesus answered and said to them,
“After you have gone on your way, report to John
what you have seen and heard. Blind people are
receiving sight, lame people are walking, lepers
are being cleansed, deaf people are hearing,
people who have died are being raised back to
life, and needy people are being told the good
news. 23 The person who does not stop believing
in me because of my actions is blessed.”
24 After John's messengers had gone away,
Jesus began to say to the crowds about John,
“What did you go out into the desert to see? A
reed shaken by the wind? 25 But what did you go
out to see? A man dressed in soft clothes? Look,
those who wear expensive clothing and who live
in luxury are in kings' palaces. 26 But what did
you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I say to you,

Luke 7:27

xxix

Luke 7:37

and more than a prophet. 27 This is he of whom
it is written,
'See, I am sending my messenger before your
face,
who will prepare your way before you.'
28 I say to you, among those born of women
none is greater than John. Yet the one who
is least in the kingdom of God is greater than
he is.” 29 (When all the people heard this,
including the tax collectors, they declared that
God is righteous, because they had been baptized
with the baptism of John. 30 But the Pharisees
and the experts in Jewish law rejected God's
purpose for themselves, because they had not
been baptized by John.) 31 “To what, then, can
I compare the people of this generation? What
are they like? 32 They are like children playing in
the marketplace, who sit and call to one another
and say, 'We played a flute for you, and you did
not dance. We sang a funeral song, and you did
not cry.' 33 For John the Baptist came eating no
bread and drinking no wine, and you say, 'He
has a demon.' 34 The Son of Man came eating and
drinking, and you say, 'Look, he is a gluttonous
man and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors
and sinners!' 35 But wisdom is justified by all her
children.”
36 Now one of the Pharisees invited Jesus to
eat with him. So after Jesus entered into the
Pharisee's house, he reclined at the table to eat.
37 Behold, there was a woman in the city who
was a sinner. When she found out that he was
reclining at the table in the Pharisee's house, she

Luke 7:38

xxx

Luke 7:49

brought an alabaster jar of perfumed oil. 38 As
she stood behind him near his feet, weeping,
she began to wet his feet with her tears, and
she wiped them with the hair of her head and
kissed his feet and anointed them with perfumed
oil. 39 When the Pharisee who had invited Jesus
saw this, he thought to himself, saying, “If this
man were a prophet, then he would know who
and what type of woman is touching him, that
she is a sinner.” 40 Jesus responded and said to
him, “Simon, I have something to say to you.”
He said, “Say it, Teacher!” 41 Jesus said, “A
certain moneylender had two debtors. The one
owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
42 When they could not pay him, he forgave them
both. Therefore, which of them will love him
more?” 43 Simon answered him and said, “I
suppose the one whom he forgave the most.”
Jesus said to him, “You have judged correctly.”
44 Jesus turned to the woman and said to Simon,
“You see this woman. I have entered into your
house. You gave me no water for my feet, but
she has wet my feet with her tears and wiped
them with her hair. 45 You did not give me a
kiss, but from the time I came in she did not
stop kissing my feet. 46 You did not anoint my
head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with
perfumed oil. 47 Therefore I say to you, her sins,
which were many, have been forgiven—for she
loved much. But the one who is forgiven little,
loves little.” 48 Then he said to her, “Your sins
are forgiven.” 49 Those reclining together began
to say among themselves, “Who is this that even

Luke 7:50

xxxi

Luke 8:10

forgives sins?” 50 Then Jesus said to the woman,
“Your faith has saved you. Go in peace.”

8

1 It happened soon afterward that Jesus began

traveling around to different cities and villages,
preaching and proclaiming the good news about
the kingdom of God. The twelve were with him,
2 as well as certain women who had been healed
of evil spirits and diseases: Mary who was called
Magdalene, from whom seven demons had been
driven out; 3 Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod's
manager; Susanna; and many others, who, out
of their possessions, provided for their needs.
4 While a large crowd of people was gathering,
and people were coming to him from town after
town, he told a parable: 5 “A farmer went out
to sow his seed. As he sowed, some fell beside
the road and it was trampled underfoot, and the
birds of the sky devoured it. 6 Some fell on the
rock, and as soon as it grew up, it withered away,
because it had no moisture. 7 Some fell among
thorns, and the thorns grew up together with the
seed and choked it. 8 But some fell on good soil
and produced a crop that was a hundred times
greater.” After Jesus had said these things, he
called out, “Whoever has ears to hear, let him
hear.”
9 His disciples asked him what this parable
meant. 10 He said, “The knowledge of the secrets
of the kingdom of God has been given to you,
but for others I speak in parables, so that 'seeing
they may not see, and hearing they may not

Luke 8:11

xxxii

Luke 8:21

understand.' 11 Now this is the meaning of the
parable: The seed is the word of God. 12 The ones
along the path are those who have heard, but
then the devil comes and takes away the word
from their hearts, so they may not believe and
be saved. 13 The ones on the rock are those who,
when they hear the word, receive it with joy. But
they have no root; they believe for a while, and
in a time of testing they fall away. 14 The seeds
that fell among the thorns are people who hear
the word, but as they go on their way, they are
choked by the cares and riches and pleasures of
this life, and their fruit does not mature. 15 But
the seed that fell on the good soil, these are the
ones who, hearing the word with an honest and
good heart, hold it securely and bear fruit with
patient endurance.
16 No one lights a lamp and covers it with a
bowl or puts it under a bed. Rather, he puts it on
a lampstand so that everyone who enters may
see the light. 17 For nothing is hidden that will
not be made known, nor is anything secret that
will not be known and come into the light. 18 So
listen carefully, for to the one who has, more will
be given to him, but the one who does not have,
even what he thinks he has will be taken away
from him.”
19 Then his mother and brothers came to him,
but they could not get near him because of the
crowd. 20 He was told, “Your mother and your
brothers are standing outside, wanting to see
you.” 21 But Jesus answered and said to them,
“My mother and my brothers are those who hear

Luke 8:22

xxxiii

Luke 8:30

the word of God and do it.”
22 Now one day he got into a boat with his
disciples, and he said to them, “Let us go over to
the other side of the lake.” They set sail. 23 But as
they sailed he fell asleep. A terrible windstorm
came down on the lake, and their boat was filling
with water, and they were in danger. 24 Then
Jesus' disciples came over to him and woke him
up, saying, “Master! Master! We are about to
die!” He awoke and rebuked the wind and the
raging of the water, and they ceased, and there
was a calm. 25 Then he said to them, “Where is
your faith?” and they were afraid. While they
were afraid they were also amazed, and they
asked one another, “Who then is this, that he
commands even the winds and the water, and
they obey him?”
26 They sailed to the region of the Gerasenes,
which is across the lake from Galilee. 27 When

Jesus stepped on the land, he was met by a
certain man from the city who had demons. For
a long time he had worn no clothes, and he did
not live in a house but among the tombs. 28 When
he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before
him and he said with a loud voice, “What have
you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High
God? I beg you, do not torment me.” 29 For
Jesus had commanded the unclean spirit to come
out of the man. For many times it had seized
him, and though he was bound with chains and
shackles and kept under guard, he had broken
his chains and he would be driven by the demon
into the wilderness. 30 Then Jesus asked him,

Luke 8:31

xxxiv

Luke 8:41

“What is your name?” and he said, “Legion,”
for many demons had entered into him. 31 They
kept begging him not to send them into the abyss.
32 Now a large herd of pigs was there feeding on
the hillside. The demons begged him to let them
go into them, and he gave them permission. 33 So
the demons came out of the man and went into
the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep
slope into the lake and was drowned. 34 When
those tending the pigs saw what had happened,
they ran off and told about it in the city and
countryside. 35 So the people went out to see
what had happened, and they came to Jesus and
found the man from whom the demons had gone
out. He was sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed
and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
36 Then those who had seen it told them how
the man who had been possessed by demons
had been healed. 37 Then all the people of the
region of the Gerasenes asked Jesus to depart
from them, for they were overwhelmed with
great fear. So he got into the boat so they
could start back. 38 The man from whom the
demons had gone out begged him to let him
go with him, but Jesus sent him away, saying,
39 “Return to your home and give a full account
of what God has done for you.” The man went on
his way, proclaiming throughout the whole city
what Jesus had done for him.
40 Now when Jesus returned, the crowd welcomed him, for they were all expecting him.
41 Behold, a man named Jairus, who was one
of the leaders of the synagogue, came and fell

Luke 8:42

xxxv

Luke 8:51

down at Jesus' feet, and he begged him to come
to his house, 42 because his only daughter, a girl
of about twelve years of age, was dying. As Jesus
was on his way, the crowds of people pressed
together around him.
43 Now a woman was there who had been
bleeding for twelve years and had spent all her
money * , and could not be healed by anyone.
44 She came behind Jesus and touched the edge of
his coat, and immediately her bleeding stopped.
45 Jesus said, “Who was it who touched me?”
When all denied it, Peter said, “Master, the
crowds of people are all around you and they
are pressing in against you.” 46 But Jesus said,
“Someone did touch me, for I know that power
has gone out from me.” 47 When the woman
saw that she could not escape notice, she came
trembling and fell down before him. In the
presence of all the people she declared why
she had touched him and how she had been
immediately healed. 48 Then he said to her,
“Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in
peace.”
49 While he was still speaking, someone came
from the synagogue leader's house, saying, “Your
daughter is dead. Do not trouble the teacher
any longer.” 50 But when Jesus heard this, he
answered Jairus, “Do not be afraid; only believe,
and she will be healed.” 51 When he came to
the house, he allowed no one to enter with him,
except Peter and John and James, and the father
* 8:43 Scholars are divided whether the phrase [she] had spent
all her money should be included here.

Luke 8:52

xxxvi

Luke 9:9

of the child and her mother. 52 Now all were
mourning and wailing for her, but he said, “Do
not weep; she is not dead but asleep.” 53 But
they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead.
54 But he took her by the hand and called out,
saying, “Child, get up!” 55 Her spirit returned,
and she rose up immediately. He ordered them
to get her something to eat. 56 Her parents were
astonished, but he ordered them to tell no one
what had happened.

9

1 He called the twelve together and gave them

power and authority over all the demons and
to cure diseases. 2 He sent them out to preach
the kingdom of God and to heal the sick. 3 He
said to them, “Take nothing for your journey—
no staff, no wallet, no bread, no money, and
no extra tunic. 4 Whatever house you enter,
stay there until you leave. 5 Wherever they
do not receive you, when you leave that town,
shake off the dust from your feet as a testimony
against them.” 6 Then they departed and went
through the villages, proclaiming the good news
and healing everywhere.
7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard about all that
was happening, and he was perplexed, because
it was said by some that John had risen from the
dead, 8 and others said that Elijah had appeared,
and still others that one of the prophets of long
ago had risen. 9 Herod said, “I beheaded John.
Who is this about whom I hear such things?”
And so he tried to see him.

Luke 9:10

xxxvii

Luke 9:20

10 When the apostles returned, they told him

everything they had done. Then he took them
with him, and they went away privately to
11 But when the
a town called Bethsaida.
crowds heard about this, they followed him. He
welcomed them and spoke to them about the
kingdom of God, and he cured those who needed
healing. 12 Now the day was about to come to
an end, and the twelve came to him and said,
“Send the crowd away that they may go into
the surrounding villages and countryside to find
lodging and food, because we are here in an
isolated place.” 13 But he said to them, “You give
them something to eat.” They said, “We have no
more than five loaves of bread and two fish—
unless we go and buy food for all these people.”
14 (There were about five thousand men.) He said
to his disciples, “Have them sit down in groups
of about fifty each.” 15 So they did this, and
made the people sit down. 16 Taking the five
loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven,
he blessed them and broke them into pieces,
and he gave them to the disciples to set before
the crowd. 17 They all ate and were satisfied,
and what was left over was picked up—twelve
baskets of broken pieces.
It came about while Jesus was praying
by himself, the disciples were with him. He
questioned them, saying, “Who do the crowds
say that I am?” 19 They answered, “John the
Baptist. But others say Elijah, and others say that
one of the prophets from long ago has risen.”
20 Then he said to them, “But who do you say
18

Luke 9:21

xxxviii

Luke 9:33

that I am?” Peter answered, “The Christ of God.”
21 But he strongly warned them to tell this to
no one, 22 saying, “The Son of Man must suffer
many things and be rejected by the elders and
chief priests and scribes, and he will be killed
and on the third day be raised.” 23 Then he said
to them all, “If anyone wants to come after me,
he must deny himself and take up his cross daily
and follow me. 24 Whoever would save his life
will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my
sake will save it. 25 What good is it for a person
to gain the whole world, and yet lose or forfeit
himself? 26 Whoever is ashamed of me and my
words, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed
when he comes in his own glory, and the glory
of the Father and of the holy angels. 27 But I say
to you truly, there are some standing here who
will not taste death before they see the kingdom
of God.”
28 Now about eight days after Jesus said these
words, he took with him Peter and John and
James and went up on the mountain to pray.
29 As he was praying, the form of his face
was changed, and his clothes became brilliant
white. 30 Behold, two men were talking with him,
Moses and Elijah, 31 who appeared in glorious
splendor.
They spoke about his departure,
which he was about to bring to completion in
Jerusalem. 32 Now Peter and those who were
with him were heavy with sleep, but when they
became fully awake, they saw his glory and the
two men who were standing with him. 33 As they
were going away from Jesus, Peter said to him,

Luke 9:34

xxxix

Luke 9:44

“Master, it is good for us to be here. Let us make
three shelters, one for you, one for Moses, and
one for Elijah.” (He did not know what he was
saying.) 34 As he was saying this, a cloud came
and overshadowed them, and they were afraid
as they entered into the cloud. 35 A voice came
out of the cloud, saying, “This is my Son, the one
who is chosen; listen to him.” 36 When the voice
had spoken, Jesus was found alone. They kept
silent and told no one in those days anything of
what they had seen.
37 Now on the next day, when they came
down from the mountain, a large crowd met
him. 38 Behold, a man from the crowd cried
out, saying, “Teacher, I beg you to look at my
son, for he is my only child. 39 You see, a
spirit takes control over him and he suddenly
screams; it causes him to have convulsions so
that he foams at the mouth. It hardly ever leaves
him and it bruises him badly. 40 I begged your
disciples to force it out, but they could not.”
41 Jesus answered and said, “You unbelieving
and depraved generation, how long must I be
with you and put up with you? Bring your
son here.” 42 While the boy was coming, the
demon threw him to the ground and shook him
with convulsions. But Jesus rebuked the unclean
spirit and healed the boy, and gave him back
to his father. 43 Then they were all amazed
at the greatness of God. While they all were
marveling at everything he was doing, he said
to his disciples, 44 “Let these words go deeply
into your ears: The Son of Man will be betrayed

Luke 9:45

xl

Luke 9:58

into the hands of men.” 45 But they did not
understand this statement. It was hidden from
them, so they could not know its meaning, and
yet they were afraid to ask about this statement.
46 Then an argument started among them
about which of them would be the greatest.
47 But Jesus, knowing the reasoning in their
hearts, took a little child and put him by his side
48 and said to them, “Whoever welcomes this
child in my name, welcomes me; and whoever
welcomes me, welcomes the one who sent me.
For whoever is least among you all is the one
who is great.”
49 John answered, “Master, we saw someone
forcing out demons in your name and we prevented him, because he does not follow along
with us.” 50 “Do not stop him,” Jesus said,
“because whoever is not against you is for you.”
51 When the days drew near for him to be taken
up, he set his face to go to Jerusalem. 52 He
sent messengers on ahead of him, and they went
and entered into a Samaritan village to prepare
everything for him. 53 But the people there did
not welcome him, because he had set his face to
go to Jerusalem. 54 When the disciples James and
John saw this, they said, “Lord, do you want us
to command fire to come down from heaven and
destroy them?” 55 But he turned and rebuked
them, 56 and they went on to another village.
57 As they were going along the road, someone
said to him, “I will follow you wherever you go.”
58 Jesus said to him, “Foxes have holes, and birds
in the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has

Luke 9:59

xli

Luke 10:9

nowhere to lay his head.” 59 Then he said to
another, “Follow me.” But he said, “Lord, first
let me go and bury my father.” 60 But he said
to him, “Leave the dead to bury their own dead.
But as for you, go and proclaim far and wide the
kingdom of God.” 61 Then someone else said, “I
will follow you, Lord, but first let me say goodbye
to those in my home.” 62 Jesus replied to him,
“No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks
back is fit for the kingdom of God.”

10

1 Now after these things, the Lord appointed

seventy * others, and sent them out two by two
ahead of him to every town and place where
he himself was about to go. 2 He said to them,
“The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are
few. Therefore ask the Lord of the harvest to
send out laborers into his harvest. 3 Go on your
way. See, I send you out as lambs in the midst
of wolves. 4 Do not carry a money bag, or a
traveler's bag, or sandals, and greet no one on
the road. 5 Whatever house you enter, first say,
'May peace be on this house!' 6 If a person of
peace is there, your peace will rest upon him, but
if not, it will return to you. 7 Remain in that same
house, eating and drinking what they provide,
for the laborer is worthy of his wages. Do not
move around from house to house. 8 Whatever
town you enter, and they receive you, eat what is
set before you, 9 and heal the sick that are there.
* 10:1 Many of the best ancient copies read “seventy” but some
read “seventy-two”

Luke 10:10

xlii

Luke 10:21

Say to them, 'The kingdom of God has come close
to you.' 10 Whenever you enter a town and they
do not receive you, go out into its streets and
say, 11 'Even the dust from your town that clings
to our feet we wipe off against you! But know
this: The kingdom of God has come near.' 12 I
say to you that on the judgment day it will be
more tolerable for Sodom than for that town.
13 Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida!
If the mighty works which were done in you had
been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
14 But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon
at the judgment than for you. 15 You, Capernaum,
do you think you will be exalted to heaven? No,
you will be brought down to Hades. 16 The one
who listens to you listens to me, and the one who
rejects you rejects me, and the one who rejects
me rejects the one who sent me.”
17 The seventy returned with joy, saying, “Lord,
even the demons submitted to us in your name.”
18 Jesus said to them, “I was watching Satan fall
from heaven as lightning. 19 See, I have given
you authority to tread on serpents and scorpions,
and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing
will in any way hurt you. 20 Nevertheless do
not rejoice only in this, that the spirits submit
to you, but rejoice even more that your names
are engraved in heaven.”
21 At that same time he rejoiced greatly in
the Holy Spirit, and said, “I praise you, Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because you concealed
these things from the wise and understanding,

Luke 10:22

xliii

Luke 10:32

and revealed them to those who are untaught,
like little children. Yes, Father, for so it was
well pleasing in your sight.” 22 “All things have
been entrusted to me from my Father, and no
one knows who the Son is except the Father, and
no one knows who the Father is except the Son
and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal
him.” 23 Then he turned around to the disciples
and said privately, “Blessed are those who see
the things that you see. 24 I say to you, many
prophets and kings desired to see the things you
see, and they did not see them, and to hear
the things that you hear, and they did not hear
them.”
25 Behold, a certain teacher of the Jewish laws
stood up so that he might test him, saying,
“Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
26 Jesus said to him, “What is written in the law?
How do you read it?” 27 He gave an answer
and he said, “You will love the Lord your God
with all your heart, with all your soul, with
all your strength, and with all your mind, and
your neighbor as yourself.” 28 Jesus said to him,
“You have answered correctly. Do this, and you
will live.” 29 But the teacher, desiring to justify
himself, said to Jesus, “Who is my neighbor?”
30 Jesus answered him and said, “A certain man
was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho. He
fell among robbers, who stripped him of his
belongings, and beat him, and left him half dead.
31 By chance a certain priest was going down that
way, and when he saw him, he passed by on
the other side. 32 Similarly a Levite also, when

Luke 10:33

xliv

Luke 11:1

he came to the place and saw him, passed by
on the other side. 33 But a certain Samaritan,
as he journeyed, came to where he was. When
he saw him, he was moved with compassion.
34 He approached him and bound up his wounds,
pouring oil and wine on them. He set him on
his own animal, and brought him to an inn, and
took care of him. 35 The next day he took out
two denarii, and gave them to the host, and said,
'Take care of him and whatever extra you spend,
when I return, I will repay you.' 36 Which of these
three do you think was a neighbor to him who
fell among the robbers?” 37 The teacher said,
“The one who showed mercy to him.” Jesus said
to him, “Go and do the same.”
38 Now as they were traveling along, he entered into a certain village, and a certain woman
named Martha welcomed him into her house.
39 She had a sister named Mary, who sat at the
Lord's feet and heard his word. 40 But Martha
was overly busy with preparing to serve a meal.
She came up to Jesus, and said, “Lord, do you
not care that my sister left me to serve alone?
Therefore tell her to help me.” 41 But the Lord
answered and said to her, “Martha, Martha, you
are anxious about many things, 42 but only one
thing is necessary. Mary has chosen what is best,
which will not be taken away from her.”
1 It

11

happened when Jesus was praying in a
certain place, one of his disciples said to him,
“Lord, teach us to pray just as John taught his

Luke 11:2

xlv

Luke 11:11

disciples.” 2 Jesus said to them, “When you pray
say,
'Father, may your name be sanctified.
May your kingdom come.
3 Give us our daily bread each day.
4 Forgive us our sins,

as we forgive everyone
who is in debt to us.

Do not lead us into temptation.'”
5 Jesus said to them, “Which of you will have

a friend, and will go to him at midnight, and say
to him, 'Friend, lend to me three loaves of bread,
6 since a friend of mine just came in from the
road, and I do not have anything to set before
him'? 7 Then the one inside who answered him
may say, 'Do not bother me. The door is already
shut, and my children, along with me, are in bed.
I am not able to get up and give bread to you.'
8 I say to you, even if he does not get up and
give bread to you because you are his friend, yet
because of your shameless persistence, he will
get up and give you as many loaves of bread as
you need. 9 I also say to you, ask, and it will
be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock,
and it will be opened to you. 10 For every asking
person receives; and the seeking person finds;
and to the person who knocks, it will be opened.
11 Which father among you, if your son asks for
a fish, will give him a snake instead of a fish?

Luke 11:12

xlvi

Luke 11:23

* 12 Or if he asks for an egg, will you give a
scorpion to him? 13 Therefore, if you who are
evil know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more will your Father from heaven
give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?”
14 Now Jesus was driving out a demon that
was mute. When the demon had gone out, the
man who had been mute spoke, and the crowd
was amazed. 15 But some of the people said,
“By Beelzebul, the ruler of demons, he is driving
out demons.” 16 Others tested him and sought
from him a sign from heaven. 17 But Jesus
knew their thoughts and said to them, “Every
kingdom divided against itself is made desolate,
and a house divided against itself falls. 18 If
Satan is divided against himself, how will his
kingdom stand? For you say I cast out demons by
Beelzebul. 19 If I drive out demons by Beelzebul,
by whom do your followers drive them out?
Because of this, they will be your judges. 20 But
if I drive out demons by the finger of God, then
the kingdom of God has come to you. 21 When a
strong man who is fully armed guards his own
house, his goods are safe, 22 but when a stronger
man overcomes him, the stronger man takes
away the armor from the man, and plunders the
man's possessions. 23 The one who is not with me
is against me, and the one who does not gather
* 11:11 The best ancient copies have the shorter reading, which

we follow here. Some ancient copies have a longer reading,
which also is found in Matthew 7:9: Which father among you,
if your son asks for a loaf of bread, will give him a stone? Or a
fish, will give him a snake?

Luke 11:24

xlvii

Luke 11:33

with me scatters. 24 When an unclean spirit
has gone away from a man, it passes through
waterless places and looks for rest. Finding
none, it says, 'I will return to my house from
which I came.' 25 Having returned, it finds that
house swept out and put in order. 26 Then it goes
and takes along with it seven other spirits more
evil than itself and they all come in to live there.
Then the final condition of that man becomes
worse than the first.”
27 It happened that, as he said these things, a
certain woman raised her voice above the crowd
and said to him, “Blessed is the womb that bore
you and the breasts that nursed you.” 28 But
he said, “Rather, blessed are they who hear the
word of God and keep it.”
29 As the crowds were increasing, Jesus began
to say, “This generation is an evil generation. It
seeks a sign, though no sign will be given to it
except the sign of Jonah. 30 For just as Jonah
became a sign to the Ninevites, so too the Son
of Man will be a sign to this generation. 31 The
Queen of the South will rise up at the judgment
with the men of this generation and condemn
them, for she came from the ends of the earth to
hear the wisdom of Solomon, and see, someone
greater than Solomon is here. 32 The men of
Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this
generation of people and will condemn it, for
they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and see,
someone greater than Jonah is here.
33 No one, after lighting a lamp, puts it in
a hidden place or under a basket, but on a

Luke 11:34

xlviii

Luke 11:46

lampstand, so that those who enter may see the
light. 34 Your eye is the lamp of the body. When
your eye is good, the whole body is filled with
light. But when your eye is bad, your body is
full of darkness. 35 Therefore, be careful that the
light in you is not darkness. 36 If then your whole
body is full of light, with no part of it in darkness,
then your whole body will be like when a lamp
shines its brightness on you.”
37 When he had finished speaking, a Pharisee
asked him to eat with him at his house, so
Jesus went in and reclined. 38 The Pharisee was
surprised that Jesus first did not wash before
dinner. 39 But the Lord said to him, “Now then,
you Pharisees clean the outside of cups and
bowls, but the inside of you is filled with greed
and evil. 40 You senseless men! Did not the
one who made the outside also make the inside?
41 Give to the poor what is inside, and then all
things will be clean for you.
42 But woe to you Pharisees, because you tithe
mint and rue and every other garden herb, but
you neglect justice and the love of God. It is
necessary to act justly and love God, without
failing to do the other things also. 43 Woe to
you Pharisees, for you love the front seats in
the synagogues and respectful greetings in the
marketplaces. 44 Woe to you, for you are like
unmarked graves that people walk over without
knowing it.”
45 One of the teachers of the law said to him,
“Teacher, what you say insults us too.” 46 Jesus
said, “Woe to you, teachers of the law! For

Luke 11:47

xlix

Luke 12:3

you put people under burdens that are hard to
carry, but you do not touch the burdens with
one of your own fingers. 47 Woe to you, because
you build tombs for the prophets, and it was
your ancestors who killed them. 48 So you are
witnesses and you consent to the works of your
ancestors, for they indeed killed them and you
build their tombs. 49 For this reason also, God's
wisdom said, 'I will send to them prophets and
apostles, and they will persecute and kill some
of them.' 50 This generation, then, will be held
responsible for all the blood of the prophets shed
since the world began, 51 from Abel's blood to the
blood of Zechariah, who was killed between the
altar and the sanctuary. Yes, I say to you, this
generation will be held responsible. 52 Woe to
you teachers of Jewish laws, because you have
taken away the key of knowledge; you do not
enter in yourselves, and you hinder those who
are entering.”
53 After Jesus left there, the scribes and the
Pharisees opposed him and argued with him
about many things, 54 trying to trap him in his
own words.

12

1 In the meantime, when many thousands of

the people were gathered together, so much that
they trampled on each other, he began to say to
his disciples first of all, “Beware of the yeast of
the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. 2 But there
is nothing concealed that will not be revealed,
and nothing hidden that will not be known. 3 So

Luke 12:4

l

Luke 12:15

whatever you have said in the darkness will be
heard in the light, and what you have spoken in
the ear in the inner rooms will be proclaimed
upon the housetops. 4 I say to you my friends,
do not be afraid of those who kill the body, and
after that they have no more that they can do.
5 But I will warn you about whom to fear. Fear
the one who, after he has killed, has authority to
throw you into hell. Yes, I say to you, fear him.
6 Are not five sparrows sold for two small coins?
Yet not one of them is forgotten in the sight of
God. 7 But even the hairs of your head are all
numbered. Do not fear. You are more valuable
than many sparrows. 8 I say to you, everyone
who confesses me before men, the Son of Man
will also confess before the angels of God, 9 but
he who denies me before men will be denied
before the angels of God. 10 Everyone who speaks
a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven
him, but to him who blasphemes against the Holy
Spirit, it will not be forgiven. 11 When they bring
you before the synagogues, the rulers, and the
authorities, do not worry about how you will
speak in your defense, or what you will say, 12 for
the Holy Spirit will teach you in that hour what
you should say.”
13 Then someone from the crowd said to
him, “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the
inheritance with me.” 14 Jesus said to him,
“Man, who made me a judge or a mediator over
you?” 15 He said to them, “Watch that you keep
yourselves from all greedy desires, because a
person's life does not consist of the abundance

Luke 12:16

li

Luke 12:29

of his possessions.” 16 Then Jesus told them a
parable, saying, “The field of a rich man yielded
abundantly, 17 and he reasoned with himself,
saying, 'What will I do, because I do not have
a place to store my crops?' 18 He said, 'This is
what I will do. I will pull down my barns and
build bigger ones, and there I will store all of
my grain and other goods. 19 I will say to my
soul, “Soul, you have many goods stored up for
many years. Rest easy, eat, drink, be merry.”'
20 But God said to him, 'Foolish man, tonight
your soul is required of you, and the things you
have prepared, whose will they be?' 21 That is
what someone is like who stores up treasure for
himself and is not rich toward God.”
22 Jesus said to his disciples, “Therefore I say to
you, do not worry about your life, what you will
eat—or about your body, what you will wear.
23 For life is more than food, and the body is
more than clothes. 24 Consider the ravens, that
they do not sow or reap. They have no storeroom
or barn, but God feeds them. How much more
valuable you are than the birds! 25 Which of you
by being anxious can add a cubit to his lifespan?
26 If then you are not able to do such a very
little thing, why do you worry about the rest?
27 Consider the lilies—how they grow. They do
not labor, neither do they spin. Yet I say to you,
even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed
like one of these. 28 If God so clothes the grass
in the field, which exists today, and tomorrow
is thrown into the oven, how much more will
he clothe you, O you of little faith! 29 Do not

Luke 12:30

lii

Luke 12:42

look for what you will eat and what you will
drink, and do not be anxious. 30 For all the
nations of the world look for these things, and
your Father knows that you need them. 31 But
seek his kingdom, and these things will be added
to you. 32 Do not fear, little flock, because your
Father is very pleased to give you the kingdom.
33 Sell your possessions and give to the poor.
Make for yourselves purses which will not wear
out—treasure in the heavens that does not run
out, where no thief comes near, and no moth
destroys. 34 For where your treasure is, there
your heart will be also.
35 Let your long clothing be tucked in at your
belt, and let your lamps be kept burning, 36 and

be like people looking for their master when he
returns from the marriage feast, so that when he
comes and knocks, they may immediately open
the door for him. 37 Blessed are those servants
whom the master will find watching when he
comes. Truly I say to you, he will tuck in his
long clothing at his belt, and have them sit down
at the table, and he will come and serve them.
38 If the master comes in the second watch of the
night, or if even in the third watch, and finds
them ready, blessed are those servants. 39 But
understand this, that if the master of the house
had known the hour the thief was coming he
would not have let his house be broken into.
40 Be ready also, because you do not know the
hour when the Son of Man comes.”
41 Peter said, “Lord, are you telling this parable
only to us, or also to everyone?” 42 The Lord

Luke 12:43

liii

Luke 12:53

said, “Who then is the faithful and wise manager
whom his lord will set over his other servants to
give them their portion of food at the right time?
43 Blessed is that servant whom his lord finds
doing that when he comes. 44 Truly I say to you
that he will set him over all his property. 45 But if
that servant says in his heart, 'My lord delays his
return,' and begins to beat the male and female
servants, and to eat and drink, and to become
drunk, 46 the lord of that servant will come in
a day when he does not expect, and in an hour
that he does not know, and will cut him in pieces
and appoint a place for him with the unfaithful.
47 That servant, having known his lord's will, and
not having prepared or done according to his
will, will be beaten with many blows. 48 But the
one who did not know and did what deserved a
beating, he will be beaten with a few blows. But
everyone who has been given much, from them
much will be required, and the one who has been
entrusted with much, even more will be asked.
49 I came to cast fire upon the earth, and how
wish that it were already kindled. 50 But I

I
have a baptism to be baptized with, and how I
am distressed until it is completed! 51 Do you
think that I came to bring peace on the earth?
No, I tell you, but rather division. 52 For from
now on there will be five in one house divided—
three people against two, and two people against
three. 53 They will be divided, father against son,
and son against father; mother against daughter,
and daughter against mother; mother-in-law
against her daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-

Luke 12:54

liv

Luke 13:5

law against mother-in-law.”
54 Jesus was saying to the crowds also, “When
you see a cloud rising in the west, immediately
you say, 'A shower is coming,' and so it happens.
55 When a south wind is blowing, you say,
'There will be a scorching heat,' and it happens.
56 Hypocrites, you know how to interpret the
appearance of the earth and the heavens, but
how is it that you do not know how to interpret
the present time? 57 Why do you not judge what
is right for yourselves? 58 For when you go with
your adversary before the magistrate, on the way
make an effort to settle the matter with him so
that he does not drag you to the judge, and so that
the judge does not deliver you to the officer, and
the officer does not throw you into prison. 59 I
say to you, you will never come out from there
until you have paid the very last bit of money.”

1 At

13

that time, some people there told him
about the Galileans whose blood Pilate mixed
with their own sacrifices. 2 Jesus answered and
said to them, “Do you think that these Galileans
were more sinful than all the other Galileans
because they suffered in this way? 3 No, I tell you.
But if you do not repent, all of you will perish
in the same way. 4 Or those eighteen people in
Siloam on whom a tower fell and killed them, do
you think they were worse sinners than other
men in Jerusalem? 5 No, I say. But if you do not
repent, all of you will also perish.”

Luke 13:6

lv

Luke 13:17

6 Jesus told this parable, “Someone had a fig

tree planted in his vineyard and he came and
looked for fruit on it but found none. 7 The
man said to the gardener, 'Look, for three years
I came and tried to find fruit on this fig tree
and found none. Cut it down. Why let it waste
the ground?' 8 The gardener answered and said,
'Leave it alone this year while I dig around it and
put manure on it. 9 If it bears fruit next year,
good; but if it does not, cut it down!'”
10 Now Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues during the Sabbath. 11 Behold, a woman

was there who for eighteen years had a spirit of
weakness. She was bent over and was not able to
straighten up completely. 12 When Jesus saw her,
he called to her and said, “Woman, you are freed
from your weakness.” 13 He placed his hands
on her, and immediately she was straightened
up and she glorified God. 14 But the synagogue
ruler was indignant because Jesus had healed
on the Sabbath. So the ruler answered and said
to the crowd, “There are six days in which it is
necessary to work. Come and be healed then, not
on the Sabbath day.” 15 The Lord answered him
and said, “Hypocrites! Does not each of you untie
his ox or his donkey from the stall and lead it to
drink on the Sabbath? 16 So too this daughter of
Abraham, whom Satan bound for eighteen long
years, should her bonds not be untied on the
Sabbath day?” 17 As he said these things, all those
who opposed him were ashamed, but the whole
crowd was rejoicing over all the glorious things
he did.

Luke 13:18

lvi

Luke 13:31

18 Then Jesus said, “What is the kingdom of
God like, and what can I compare it to? 19 It is like

a mustard seed that a man took and threw into
his garden, and it grew into a big tree, and the
birds of heaven built their nests in its branches.”
20 Again he said, “To what can I compare the
kingdom of God? 21 It is like yeast that a woman
took and mixed with three measures of flour
until it spread through all the flour.”
22 Then Jesus traveled through the towns and
villages, teaching and making his way toward
Jerusalem. 23 Someone said to him, “Lord, are
only a few people to be saved?” So he said to
them, 24 “Struggle to enter through the narrow
door, because, I say to you, many will want to
enter, but will not be able to enter. 25 Once the
owner of the house gets up and locks the door,
then you will stand outside and pound the door
and say, 'Lord, Lord, let us in.' He will answer
and say to you, 'I do not know you or where
you are from.' 26 Then you will say, 'We ate
and drank in front of you and you taught in our
streets.' 27 But he will reply, 'I say to you, I do not
know where you are from. Get away from me,
you evildoers!' 28 There will be crying and the
grinding of teeth when you see Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and all the prophets in God's kingdom, but
you are thrown out. 29 They will come from the
east, west, north, and south, and be seated at a
table in the kingdom of God. 30 Know this, those
who are least important will be first, and those
who are most important will be last.”
31 Shortly after, some Pharisees came and said

Luke 13:32

lvii

Luke 14:8

to him, “Go and leave here because Herod wants
to kill you.” 32 Jesus said, “Go and tell that fox,
'Look, I cast out demons and perform healings
today and tomorrow, and the third day I will
reach my goal.' 33 In any case, it is necessary
for me to continue on today, tomorrow, and the
following day, since it is not acceptable to kill
a prophet away from Jerusalem. 34 Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, who kills the prophets and stones
those sent to you. How often I desired to gather
your children the way a hen gathers her brood
under her wings, but you did not desire this.
35 See, your house is abandoned. I say to you,
you will not see me until you say, 'Blessed is he
who comes in the name of the Lord.'”

14

1 It happened one Sabbath, when he went into

the house of one of the leaders of the Pharisees to
eat bread, that they were watching him closely.
2 Behold, there in front of him was a man who
was suffering from edema. 3 Jesus asked the
experts in the Jewish law and the Pharisees, “Is
it lawful to heal on the Sabbath, or not?” 4 But
they kept silent. So Jesus took hold of him,
healed him, and sent him away. 5 He said to
them, “Which of you who has a son or an ox
that falls into a well on the Sabbath day will not
immediately pull him out?” 6 They were not able
to give an answer to these things.
7 When Jesus noticed how those who were
invited chose the seats of honor, he spoke a
parable, saying to them, 8 “When you are invited

Luke 14:9

lviii

Luke 14:18

by someone to a wedding feast, do not sit down
in the place of honor, because someone may
have been invited who is more honored than
you. 9 When the person who invited both of you
arrives, he will say to you, 'Give this other person
your place,' and then in shame you will proceed
to take the lowest place. 10 But when you are
invited, go and sit down in the lowest place, so
that when the one who has invited you comes,
he may say to you, 'Friend, go up higher.' Then
you will be honored in the presence of all who sit
at the table with you. 11 For everyone who exalts
himself will be humbled, and he who humbles
himself will be exalted.”
12 Jesus also said to the man who had invited
him, “When you give a dinner or a banquet, do
not invite your friends or your brothers or your
relatives or your rich neighbors, as they may
also invite you in return, and you will be repaid.
13 But when you give a banquet, invite the poor,
the crippled, the lame, and the blind, 14 and you
will be blessed, because they cannot repay you.
For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the
just.”
15 When one of them who sat at the table
with Jesus heard these things, he said to him,
“Blessed is he who will eat bread in the kingdom
of God!” 16 But Jesus said to him, “A certain
man prepared a large dinner and invited many.
17 When the dinner was prepared, he sent his
servant to say to those who were invited, 'Come,
because everything is now ready.' 18 They all
alike began to make excuses. The first said to

Luke 14:19

lix

Luke 14:31

him, 'I have bought a field, and I must go out
and see it. Please excuse me.' 19 Another said, 'I
have bought five pairs of oxen, and I am going to
try them out. Please excuse me.' 20 Then another
man said, 'I have married a wife, and therefore
I cannot come.' 21 The servant came and told
his master these things. Then the master of the
house became angry and said to his servant, 'Go
out quickly into the streets and lanes of the town
and bring in here the poor, the crippled, the
blind, and the lame.' 22 The servant said, 'Master,
what you commanded has been done, and yet
there is still room.' 23 The master said to the
servant, 'Go out into the highways and hedges
and compel them to come in, that my house may
be filled. 24 For I say to you, none of those men
who were invited will taste my dinner.'”
25 Now large crowds were going with him, and
he turned and said to them, 26 “If anyone comes
to me and does not hate his own father, mother,
wife, children, brothers and sisters, and even his
own life, he cannot be my disciple. 27 Whoever
does not carry his own cross and come after me
cannot be my disciple. 28 For which of you who
desires to build a tower does not first sit down
and count the cost to calculate if he has what he
needs to complete it? 29 Otherwise, when he has
laid a foundation and is not able to finish, all who
see it will begin to mock him, 30 saying, 'This man
began to build and was not able to finish.' 31 Or
what king, as he goes to encounter another king
in war, will not sit down first and take advice
about whether he is able with ten thousand men
to fight the other king who comes against him

Luke 14:32

lx

Luke 15:9

with twenty thousand men? 32 If not, while the
other army is still far away, he sends a delegation
and asks for conditions of peace. 33 So therefore,
any one of you who does not give up all that he
has cannot be my disciple. 34 Salt is good, but
if the salt has lost its taste, how can it be made
salty again? 35 It is of no use for the soil or even
for the manure pile. It is thrown away. He who
has ears to hear, let him hear.”

15

1 Now all the tax collectors and other sinners
were coming to Jesus to listen to him. 2 Both the

Pharisees and the scribes grumbled to each other,
saying, “This man welcomes sinners, and even
eats with them.”
3 Jesus spoke this parable to them, saying,
4 “Which one of you, if he has a hundred sheep
and then loses one of them, will not leave the
ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after the
lost one until he finds it? 5 Then when he has
found it, he lays it across his shoulders and
rejoices. 6 When he comes to the house, he calls
together his friends and his neighbors, saying to
them, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found my lost
sheep.' 7 I say to you that even so, there will be
joy in heaven over one sinner who repents, more
than over ninety-nine righteous persons who do
not need to repent.
8 Or what woman who has ten silver coins,
if she were to lose one coin, would not light a
lamp, sweep the house, and seek diligently until
she has found it? 9 When she has found it, she

Luke 15:10

lxi

Luke 15:21

calls together her friends and neighbors, saying,
'Rejoice with me, for I have found the coin which
I lost.' 10 Even so, I say to you, there is joy in the
presence of the angels of God over one sinner
who repents.”
11 Then Jesus said, “A certain man had two
sons, 12 and the younger of them said to his
father, 'Father, give me the portion of the wealth
that falls to me.' So he divided his property
between them. 13 Not many days later, the
younger son gathered together all he owned and
went to a country far away, and there he wasted
all his wealth by living recklessly. 14 Now when
he had spent everything, a severe famine spread
through that country, and he began to be in
need. 15 He went and hired himself out to one
of the citizens of that country, who sent him into
his fields to feed pigs. 16 He would gladly have
eaten the carob pods that the pigs ate, because no
one gave him anything. 17 But when the young
son came to himself, he said, 'How many of my
father's hired servants have more than enough
food, and I am here, dying from hunger! 18 I
will leave here and go to my father, and will say
to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven
and against you. 19 I am no longer worthy to
be called your son; make me as one of your
hired servants.”' 20 So the young son left and
came toward his father. While he was still far
away, his father saw him and was moved with
compassion, and he ran and embraced him and
kissed him. 21 The son said to him, 'Father, I have
sinned against heaven and against you. I am

Luke 15:22

lxii

Luke 16:1

no longer worthy to be called your son.' 22 The
father said to his servants, 'Bring quickly the best
robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his
hand, and sandals on his feet. 23 Then bring the
fattened calf and kill it. Let us celebrate with a
feast! 24 For my son was dead, and now he is
alive. He was lost, and now he is found.' Then
they began to celebrate. 25 Now his older son
was out in the field. As he came and approached
the house, he heard music and dancing. 26 He
called to one of the servants and asked what
these things might be. 27 The servant said to
him, 'Your brother has come home and your
father has killed the fattened calf because he
has returned safely.' 28 The older son was angry
and would not go in, and his father came out
and begged him. 29 But the older son answered
and said to his father, 'Look, these many years I
slaved for you, and I never broke a rule of yours,
and yet you never gave me a young goat that
I might celebrate with my friends, 30 but when
your son came, who has devoured your living
with prostitutes, you killed for him the fattened
calf.' 31 The father said to him, 'Son, you are
always with me, and all that is mine is yours.
32 But it was proper for us to feast and be happy,
for this brother of yours was dead, and is now
alive; he was lost, and has now been found.'”

16

1 Jesus also said to the disciples, “There was a

certain rich man who had a manager, and it was
reported to him that this manager was wasting

Luke 16:2

lxiii

Luke 16:13

his possessions. 2 So the rich man called him and
said to him, 'What is this that I hear about you?
Give an account of your management, for you
can no longer be manager.' 3 The manager said
to himself, 'What should I do, since my master is
taking away my management job? I do not have
strength to dig, and I am ashamed to beg. 4 I
know what I will do, so that when I am removed
from my management job, people will welcome
me into their houses.' 5 Then the manager called
for each one of his master's debtors, and he
asked the first one, 'How much do you owe to
my master?' 6 He said, 'A hundred baths of olive
oil.' He said to him, 'Take your bill, sit down
quickly, and write fifty.' 7 Then the manager said
to another, 'How much do you owe?' He said, 'A
hundred cors of wheat.' He said to him, 'Take
your bill, and write eighty.' 8 The master then
commended the unrighteous manager because
he had acted shrewdly. For the children of this
world are more shrewd in dealing with their
own people than are the children of light. 9 I say
to you, make friends for yourselves by means of
unrighteous wealth, so that when it is gone, they
may welcome you into the eternal dwellings.
10 He who is faithful in very little is also faithful
in much, and he who is unrighteous in very little
is also unrighteous in much. 11 If you have not
been faithful in using unrighteous wealth, who
will trust you with true wealth? 12 If you have not
been faithful in using other people's property,
who will give you money of your own? 13 No
servant can serve two masters, for either he will

Luke 16:14

lxiv

Luke 16:24

hate the one and love the other, or else he will be
devoted to one and despise the other. You cannot
serve God and wealth.”
14 Now the Pharisees, who were lovers of
money, heard all these things, and they ridiculed
him. 15 He said to them, “You justify yourselves
in the sight of men, but God knows your hearts.
That which is exalted among men is detestable
in the sight of God. 16 The law and the prophets
were in effect until John came. From that time
on, the gospel of the kingdom of God is preached,
and everyone tries to force their way into it.
17 But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass
away than for one stroke of a letter of the law to
become invalid.
18 Everyone who divorces his wife and marries
another commits adultery, and he who marries
one who is divorced from her husband commits
adultery.
19 Now there was a certain rich man who
was clothed in purple and fine linen and was
enjoying every day his great wealth. 20 A certain
beggar named Lazarus was laid at his gate,
covered with sores, 21 and longing to eat what
fell from the rich man's table. Even the dogs
came and licked his sores. 22 It came about that
the beggar died and was carried away by the
angels to Abraham's side. The rich man also
died and was buried, 23 and in Hades, being in
torment, he lifted up his eyes and saw Abraham
far away and Lazarus at his side. 24 So he cried
out and said, 'Father Abraham, have mercy on
me and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip

Luke 16:25

lxv

Luke 17:4

of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for
I am in anguish in this flame.' 25 But Abraham
said, 'Child, remember that in your lifetime you
received your good things, and Lazarus in like
manner evil things. But now he is comforted
here, and you are in agony. 26 Besides all this, a
great chasm has been put in place, so that those
who want to cross over from here to you cannot,
and no one can cross over from there to us.'
27 The rich man said, 'I beg you, Father Abraham,
that you would send him to my father's house—
28 for I have five brothers—in order that he may
warn them, so that it may not be that they come
into this place of torment.' 29 But Abraham said,
'They have Moses and the prophets; let them
listen to them.' 30 The rich man replied, 'No,
Father Abraham, but if someone would go to
them from the dead, they will repent.' 31 But
Abraham said to him, 'If they do not listen to
Moses and the prophets, neither will they be
persuaded if someone rises from the dead.'”

17

1 Jesus said to his disciples, “It is certain there

will be things that can cause us to sin, but woe to
that person through whom they come! 2 It would
be better for him if a millstone were put around
his neck and he were thrown into the sea than
that he should cause one of these little ones to
stumble. 3 Watch yourselves. If your brother
sins, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him.
4 If he sins against you seven times in the day,

Luke 17:5

lxvi

Luke 17:16

and seven times returns to you, saying, 'I repent,'
you must forgive him!”
5 The apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our
faith.” 6 The Lord said, “If you had faith like a
mustard seed, you would say to this mulberry
tree, 'Be uprooted, and be planted in the sea,' and
it would obey you. 7 But which of you, who has
a servant plowing or keeping sheep, will say to
him when he has come in from the field, 'Come
immediately and sit down to eat'? 8 Will he not
say to him, 'Prepare something for me to eat,
and put a belt around your clothes and serve me
until I have finished eating and drinking. Then
afterward you will eat and drink'? 9 He does
not thank the servant because he did the things
that were commanded, does he? 10 Even so you
also, when you have done everything that you
are commanded, should say, 'We are unworthy
servants. We have only done what we ought to
do.'”
11 It came about that as he traveled to
Jerusalem, he went along the border between
Samaria and Galilee. 12 As he entered into a
certain village, there he was met by ten men
who were lepers. They stood far away from
him 13 and they lifted up their voices, saying,
“Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.” 14 When
he saw them, he said to them, “Go and show
yourselves to the priests.” As they went away
they were cleansed. 15 When one of them saw
that he was healed, he turned back, with a loud
voice glorifying God. 16 He fell down at Jesus'
feet, giving him thanks. He was a Samaritan.

Luke 17:17

lxvii

Luke 17:30

17 Then Jesus said, “Were not the ten cleansed?
Where are the nine? 18 Were there no others

who returned to give glory to God, except this
foreigner?” 19 He said to him, “Arise, and go.
Your faith has made you well.”
20 Being

asked by the Pharisees when the
kingdom of God would come, Jesus answered
them and said, “The kingdom of God does not
come with careful observing. 21 Neither will they
say, 'Look, here it is!' or, 'There it is!' For look,
the kingdom of God is within you.”
22 He

said to the disciples, “The days are
coming when you will desire to see one of the
days of the Son of Man, but you will not see it.
23 Then they will say to you, 'Look, there! Look,
here!' But do not go out or run after them, 24 for
as the lightning shines brightly when it flashes
from one part of the sky to another part of the
sky, so will the Son of Man be in his day. 25 But
first he must suffer many things and be rejected
by this generation. 26 As it happened in the days
of Noah, even so will it also happen in the days
of the Son of Man. 27 They ate, they drank, they
married, and they were given in marriage, until
the day that Noah entered into the ark—and the
flood came and destroyed them all. 28 Likewise,
even as it happened in the days of Lot—they
were eating and drinking, buying and selling,
planting and building. 29 But in the day that Lot
went out from Sodom, it rained fire and sulfur
from heaven and destroyed them all. 30 After the
same manner it will be in the day that the Son

Luke 17:31

lxviii

Luke 18:7

of Man is revealed. 31 In that day, do not let him
who is on the housetop go down to get his goods
out of the house; and do not let him who is in the
field return. 32 Remember Lot's wife. 33 Whoever
seeks to gain his life will lose it, but whoever
loses his life will save it. 34 I tell you, in that
night there will be two people in one bed. One
will be taken, and the other will be left. 35 There
will be two women grinding together. One will
be taken, and the other will be left.” 36 * 37 They
asked him, “Where, Lord?” and he said to them,
“Where there is a body, there will the vultures
also be gathered together.”
1 Then

18

he spoke a parable to them about
how they should always pray and not become
discouraged, 2 saying, “In a certain city there was
a judge who did not fear God and did not respect
people. 3 Now there was a widow in that city,
and she came often to him, saying, 'Help me get
justice against my opponent.' 4 For a long time
he was not willing to help her, but after a while
he said to himself, 'Though I do not fear God or
respect man, 5 yet because this widow causes me
trouble, I will help her get justice, so that she
does not wear me out by her constant coming.'”
6 Then the Lord said, “Listen to what the unjust
judge says. 7 Now will not God also bring justice
to his chosen ones who cry out to him day and
* 17:36 Luke 17:36 the best ancient copies omit, vs. 36 There
will be two in the field; one will be taken and the other left .

Luke 18:8

lxix

Luke 18:18

night? Will he delay long over them? 8 I say to
you that he will bring justice to them speedily.
Even so, when the Son of Man comes, will he
indeed find faith on the earth?”
9 Then he also spoke this parable to some
who were persuaded in themselves that they
were righteous and who despised other people,
10 “Two men went up into the temple to pray—
the one was a Pharisee and the other was a
tax collector. 11 The Pharisee stood and prayed
these things about himself, 'God, I thank you
that I am not like other people—robbers, unrighteous people, adulterers—or even like this tax
collector. 12 I fast two times every week. I give
tithes of all that I get.' 13 But the tax collector,
standing at a distance, would not even lift up his
eyes to heaven, but hit his breast, saying, 'God,
have mercy on me, a sinner.' 14 I say to you,
this man went back down to his house justified
rather than the other, because everyone who
exalts himself will be humbled, but everyone
who humbles himself will be exalted.”
15 The people were also bringing to him their
infants so that he might touch them, but when
the disciples saw it, they rebuked them. 16 But
Jesus called them to him, saying, “Permit the
little children to come to me, and do not forbid
them. For the kingdom of God belongs to such
ones. 17 Truly I say to you, whoever will not
receive the kingdom of God like a child will
definitely not enter it.”
18 A certain ruler asked him, saying, “Good
teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”

Luke 18:19

lxx

Luke 18:31

19 Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good?
No one is good, except God alone. 20 You know

the commandments—do not commit adultery, do
not kill, do not steal, do not testify falsely, honor
your father and mother.” 21 The ruler said, “All
these things I have obeyed from the time I was
a youth.” 22 When Jesus heard that, he said to
him, “One thing you still lack. You must sell all
that you have and distribute it to the poor, and
you will have treasure in heaven—and come,
follow me.” 23 But when the ruler heard these
things, he became extremely sad, for he was very
rich. 24 Then Jesus, seeing him, became very sad
* and said, “How difficult it is for those who
are rich to enter the kingdom of God! 25 For it
is easier for a camel to go through a needle's
eye, than for a rich person to enter the kingdom
of God.” 26 Those hearing it said, “Then who
can be saved?” 27 Jesus answered, “The things
which are impossible with people are possible
with God.” 28 Peter said, “Well, we have left
everything that is our own and have followed
you.” 29 Jesus then said to them, “Truly, I say
to you that there is no one who has left house,
or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children, for
the sake of the kingdom of God, 30 who will not
receive much more in this world, and in the
world to come, eternal life.”
31 After he gathered the twelve to himself, he
said to them, “See, we are going up to Jerusalem,
* 18:24 Scholars are divided whether the phrase: [he] became
very sad should be included here. Compare vs 23.

Luke 18:32

lxxi

Luke 19:2

and all the things that have been written by
the prophets about the Son of Man will be
accomplished. 32 For he will be given over to
the Gentiles, and will be mocked, and shamefully
treated, and spit upon. 33 After whipping him,
they will kill him, and on the third day he will
rise again.” 34 They understood none of these
things, and this word was hidden from them,
and they did not understand the things that were
said.
35 It came about that, as Jesus approached
Jericho, a certain blind man was sitting by the
road begging, 36 and hearing a crowd going by,
he asked what was happening. 37 They told him
that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by. 38 So
the blind man cried out, saying, “Jesus, Son of
David, have mercy on me.” 39 The ones who were
walking ahead rebuked the blind man, telling
him to be quiet. But he cried out all the more,
“Son of David, have mercy on me.” 40 Jesus stood
still and commanded that the man be brought
to him. Then when the blind man was near,
Jesus asked him, 41 “What do you want me to do
for you?” He said, “Lord, I want to receive my
sight.” 42 Jesus said to him, “Receive your sight.
Your faith has healed you.” 43 Immediately he
received his sight and followed him, glorifying
God. All the people, when they saw this, gave
praise to God.

19

1 Jesus entered and was passing through Jericho. 2 Behold, there was a man there named

Luke 19:3

lxxii

Luke 19:15

Zacchaeus. He was a chief tax collector and was
rich. 3 He was trying to see who Jesus was, but
could not see over the crowd, because he was
small in height. 4 So he ran on ahead of the
people and climbed up into a sycamore tree to
see him, because Jesus was about to pass that
way. 5 When Jesus came to the place, he looked
up and said to him, “Zacchaeus, come down
quickly, for today I must stay at your house.”
6 So he hurried and came down and welcomed
him joyfully. 7 When everyone saw this, they all
complained, saying, “He has gone in to visit a
man who is a sinner.” 8 Zacchaeus stood and said
to the Lord, “Look, Lord, the half of my goods I
give to the poor, and if I have cheated anyone of
anything, I will restore four times the amount.”
9 Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to
this house, because he too is a son of Abraham.
10 For the Son of Man came to seek and to save
the people who are lost.”
11 As they heard these things, he continued
speaking and told a parable, because he was near
to Jerusalem, and they thought that the kingdom
of God was about to appear immediately. 12 He
said therefore, “A certain nobleman went into a
far country to receive for himself a kingdom and
then to return. 13 He called ten of his servants,
and gave them ten minas, and said to them,
'Conduct business until I come back.' 14 But his
citizens hated him and sent a delegation after
him, saying, 'We will not have this man rule over
us.' 15 It happened when he came back again,
having received the kingdom, he commanded
the servants to whom he had given the money

Luke 19:16

lxxiii

Luke 19:29

to be called to him, that he might know what
profit they had made by doing business. 16 The
first came before him, saying, 'Lord, your mina
has made ten minas more.' 17 The nobleman
said to him, 'Well done, good servant. Because
you were faithful in very little, you will have
authority over ten cities.' 18 The second came,
saying, 'Your mina, lord, has made five minas.'
19 The nobleman said to him, 'You take charge
over five cities.' 20 Another came, saying, 'Lord,
here is your mina, which I kept safely in a cloth,
21 for I was afraid of you, because you are a
demanding person. You take up what you did
not put in, and you reap what you did not sow.'
22 The nobleman said to him, 'By your own words
I will judge you, you wicked servant. You knew
that I am a demanding person, that I take up
what I did not put in, and that I reaped what I did
not sow. 23 Then why did you not put my money
in the bank, so that when I returned I would have
collected it with interest?' 24 The nobleman said
to them that stood by, 'Take away from him the
mina, and give it to him that has the ten minas.'
25 They said to him, 'Lord, he has ten minas.' 26 'I
say to you, that everyone who has will be given
more, but from him that has not, even that which
he has will be taken away. 27 But these enemies
of mine, those who did not want me to reign over
them, bring them here and kill them before me.'”
28 When he had said these things, he went on
ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
29 It came about that when he came near to
Bethphage and Bethany, to the hill that is called

Luke 19:30

lxxiv

Luke 19:44

Olivet, he sent two of the disciples, 30 saying,
“Go into the next village. As you enter, you will
find a colt that has never been ridden. Untie it
and bring it to me. 31 If anyone asks you, 'Why
are you untying it?' say, 'The Lord has need of
it.'” 32 Those who were sent went and found
the colt just as Jesus had told them. 33 As they
were untying the colt, the owners said to them,
“Why are you untying the colt?” 34 They said,
“The Lord has need of it.” 35 They brought it
to Jesus, and they threw their cloaks upon the
colt and set Jesus on it. 36 As he went, they
spread their cloaks on the road. 37 As he was now
approaching the place where the Mount of Olives
descends, the whole multitude of the disciples
began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice
for all the mighty works which they had seen,
38 saying, “Blessed is the king who comes in the
name of the Lord! Peace in heaven and glory
in the highest!” 39 Some of the Pharisees in the
multitude said to him, “Teacher, rebuke your
disciples.” 40 Jesus answered and said, “I tell you,
if these were silent, the stones would cry out.”
41 When Jesus approached the city, he wept
over it, 42 saying, “If only you had known in this
day, even you, the things which bring you peace!
But now they are hidden from your eyes. 43 For
the days will come upon you when your enemies
will build a barricade around you, and surround
you, and press in on you from every side. 44 They
will strike you down to the ground and your
children with you. They will not leave one stone
upon another, because you did not recognize it

Luke 19:45

lxxv

Luke 20:9

when God was trying to save you.”
45 Jesus entered the temple and began to cast
out those who were selling, 46 saying to them, “It
is written, 'My house will be a house of prayer,'
but you have made it a den of robbers.”
47 So Jesus was teaching daily in the temple.
The chief priests and the scribes and the leaders
of the people wanted to kill him, 48 but they could
not find a way to do it, because all the people
were listening to him intently.

20

1 It came about one day, as Jesus was teaching

the people in the temple and preaching the
gospel, the chief priests and the scribes came to
him with the elders. 2 They spoke, saying to him,
“Tell us by what authority you do these things,
or who it is who gave you this authority.” 3 He
answered and said to them, “I will also ask you
a question, and you tell me. 4 The baptism of
John: was it from heaven or from men?” 5 They
reasoned with themselves, saying, “If we say,
'From heaven,' he will say, 'Then why did you not
believe him?' 6 But if we say, 'From men,' all the
people will stone us, for they are persuaded that
John was a prophet.” 7 So they answered that
they did not know where it came from. 8 Jesus
said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what
authority I do these things.”
9 He told the people this parable, “A man
planted a vineyard, rented it out to vine growers,
and went into another country for a long time.

Luke 20:10

lxxvi

Luke 20:20

10 At the appointed time he sent a servant to

the vine growers, that they should give him of
the fruit of the vineyard. But the vine growers
beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
11 He then sent yet another servant and they
also beat him, treated him shamefully, and sent
him away empty-handed. 12 He also sent yet a
third and they also wounded him, and threw
him out. 13 So the lord of the vineyard said,
'What will I do? I will send my beloved son.
Maybe they will respect him.' 14 But when the
vine growers saw him, they discussed among
themselves, saying, 'This is the heir. Let us kill
him, that the inheritance may be ours.' 15 They
threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
What then will the lord of the vineyard do to
them? 16 He will come and destroy these vine
growers, and will give the vineyard to others.”
When they heard it, they said, “May it never be!”
17 But Jesus looked at them, and said, “What is
the meaning of that which is written:
'The stone that the builders rejected has become
the cornerstone'?
18 Every one who falls on that stone will be
broken to pieces. But on whomever it falls, it
will crush.”
19 So the scribes and the chief priests sought
to lay hands on him in that very hour, for they
knew that he had spoken this parable against
them.
But they were afraid of the people.
20 Watching him carefully, they sent out spies
who pretended to be righteous, that they might
find fault with his speech, so as to deliver him up

Luke 20:21

lxxvii

Luke 20:36

to the rule and to the authority of the governor.
21 They asked him, saying, “Teacher, we know
that you say and teach rightly, and are not
influenced by anyone's position, but you teach
the truth about the way of God. 22 Is it lawful for
us to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?” 23 But Jesus
understood their craftiness, and said to them,
24 “Show me a denarius. Whose image and name
is on it?” They said, “Caesar's.” 25 He said to
them, “Then give to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.”
26 They were not able to find fault with what he
had said in front of the people, but marveling at
his answer, they were silent.
27 When some of the Sadducees came to him,

the ones who say that there is no resurrection,
28 they asked him, saying, “Teacher, Moses wrote
to us that if a man's brother dies, having a
wife, and being childless, the man should take
the brother's wife, and have a child for his
brother. 29 There were seven brothers and the
first took a wife, and died childless, 30 and the
second as well. 31 The third took her, and
likewise the seven also left no children, and died.
32 Afterward the woman also died.
33 In the
resurrection then, whose wife will she be? For
the seven had her as their wife.” 34 Jesus said
to them, “The sons of this world marry and are
given in marriage. 35 But those who are regarded
as worthy in that age to receive the resurrection
from the dead will neither marry nor be given in
marriage. 36 Neither can they die anymore, for
they are equal to the angels and are sons of God,

Luke 20:37

lxxviii

Luke 21:4

being sons of the resurrection. 37 But that the
dead are raised, even Moses showed, in the place
concerning the bush, where he calls the Lord the
God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the
God of Jacob. 38 Now he is not the God of the
dead, but of the living, because all live to him.”
39 Some of the scribes answered, “Teacher, you
have answered well.” 40 For they did not dare
ask him any more questions.
41 Jesus said to them, “How do they say that the
Christ is David's son? 42 For David himself says
in the Book of Psalms,
The Lord said to my Lord,
'Sit at my right hand,
43 until I make your enemies your footstool.'
44 David therefore calls the Christ 'Lord', so how
is he David's son?”
45 In the hearing of all the people he said
to his disciples, 46 “Beware of the scribes, who
desire to walk in long robes, and love special
greetings in the marketplaces, and chief seats
in the synagogues, and chief places at feasts.
47 They also devour widows' houses, and for a
show they make long prayers. Men like this will
receive greater condemnation.”

21

1 Jesus looked up and saw the rich men who
were putting their gifts into the treasury. 2 He

saw a certain poor widow putting in two mites.
3 So he said, “Truly I say to you, this poor widow
put in more than all of them. 4 All of these gave

Luke 21:5

lxxix

Luke 21:17

gifts out of their abundance. But this widow, out
of her poverty, put in all she had to live on.”
5 As some spoke of the temple, how it was
decorated with beautiful stones and offerings, he
said, 6 “As for these things that you see, the days
will come when not one stone will be left on
another which will not be torn down.” 7 So they
asked him, saying, “Teacher, when will these
things happen? What will be the sign when these
things are about to happen?” 8 Jesus answered,
“Be careful that you are not deceived. For many
will come in my name, saying, 'I am he,' and, 'The
time is near.' Do not go after them. 9 When you
hear of wars and riots, do not be terrified, for
these things must happen first, but the end will
not happen immediately.”
10 Then he said to them, “Nation will rise
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
11 There will be great earthquakes, and in various places famines and plagues. There will be
terrifying events and great signs from heaven.
12 But before all of these things, they will lay their
hands on you and will persecute you, delivering
you over to the synagogues and prisons, bringing
you before kings and governors because of my
name. 13 It will lead to an opportunity for
your testimony. 14 Therefore resolve in your
hearts not to prepare your defense ahead of time,
15 for I will give you words and wisdom that
all your adversaries will not be able to resist or
contradict. 16 But you will be delivered up also
by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends, and
they will put some of you to death. 17 You will be

Luke 21:18

lxxx

Luke 21:31

hated by everyone because of my name. 18 But
not a hair of your head will perish. 19 In your
endurance you will gain your souls.
20 When you see Jerusalem surrounded by
armies, then know that its destruction is near.
21 Then let those in Judea flee to the mountains,
let those who are in the city leave it, and those
who are out in the country must not enter the
city. 22 For these are days of vengeance, so that
all the things that are written will be fulfilled.
23 Woe to them who are pregnant and to them
who are nursing in those days! For there will be
great distress upon the land, and wrath to this
people. 24 They will fall by the edge of the sword,
and they will be led captive into all the nations,
and Jerusalem will be trampled by the Gentiles
until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
25 There will be signs in the sun, in the moon,
and in the stars, and on the earth. The nations
will be in distress, anxious because of the roar
of the sea and waves. 26 There will be men
fainting from fear and from expectation of the
things which are coming upon the world. For the
powers of the heavens will be shaken. 27 Then
they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud
with power and great glory. 28 But when these
things begin to happen, stand up and lift up
your heads, because your deliverance is coming
near.”
29 Jesus told them a parable, “Look at the fig
tree, and all the trees. 30 When they sprout buds,
you see for yourselves and know that summer
is already near. 31 So also, when you see these

Luke 21:32

lxxxi

Luke 22:6

things happening, you know that the kingdom of
God is near. 32 Truly I say to you, this generation
will not pass away until all these things take
place. 33 Heaven and earth will pass away, but
my words will never pass away.
34 But pay attention to yourselves, so that
your hearts are not burdened with the effects of
drinking and intoxication, and the worries of life,
and then that day will close on you suddenly like
a trap. 35 For it will come upon everyone living
on the face of the whole earth. 36 But be alert at
all times, praying that you may be strong enough
to escape all these things that will take place, and
to stand before the Son of Man.”
37 So during the days he was teaching in the
temple, and at night he went out and stayed on
the Mount of Olives. 38 All of the people came
early in the morning to hear him in the temple.

22

1 Now the Festival of Unleavened Bread was
approaching, which is called the Passover. 2 The

chief priests and the scribes discussed how they
could put Jesus to death, for they were afraid of
the people.
3 Then Satan entered into Judas Iscariot, who
was one of the twelve. 4 Judas went to the chief
priests and captains and discussed with them
how he would betray Jesus to them. 5 They
were glad, and agreed to give him money. 6 He
consented, and looked for an opportunity to
deliver him to them away from the crowd.

Luke 22:7

lxxxii

Luke 22:21

7 Then came the day of unleavened bread, on

which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed.
8 So Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and
prepare for us the Passover meal, so that we may
eat it.” 9 They said to him, “Where do you want
us to make preparations?” 10 He answered them,
“Listen, when you have entered the city, a man
bearing a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow
him into the house that he goes into. 11 Then
say to the master of the house, 'The Teacher says
to you, “Where is the guest room, where I will
eat the Passover with my disciples?”' 12 He will
show you a large furnished upper room. Make
the preparations there.” 13 So they went, and
found everything as he had said to them. Then
they prepared the Passover meal.
14 When the time came, he sat down with the
apostles. 15 Then he said to them, “I have greatly
desired to eat this Passover with you before I
suffer. 16 For I say to you, I will not eat it
again, until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.”
17 Then Jesus took a cup, and when he had given
thanks, he said, “Take this, and share it among
yourselves. 18 For I say to you, I will not drink of
the fruit of the vine again until the kingdom of
God comes.” 19 Then he took bread, and when he
had given thanks, he broke it, and gave to them,
saying, “This is my body which is given for you.
Do this in remembrance of me.” 20 He took the
cup in the same way after supper, saying, “This
cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is
poured out for you. 21 But pay attention. The
one who betrays me is with me at the table.

Luke 22:22

lxxxiii

Luke 22:34

22 For the Son of Man indeed goes as it has been

determined. But woe to that man through whom
he is betrayed!” 23 They began to discuss among
themselves which one of them it might be who
would do this.
24 Then there arose also a quarrel among
them about which of them was considered to be
greatest. 25 He said to them, “The kings of the
Gentiles are masters over them, and the ones
who have authority over them are referred to
as those who do good to their people. 26 But it
must not be like this with you. Instead, let the
one who is the greatest among you become like
the youngest, and let the one who is the most
important become like the one who serves. 27 For
who is greater, the one who sits at the table, or
the one who serves? Is it not the one who sits at
the table? Yet I am among you as one who serves.
28 But you are the ones who have continued with
me in my temptations. 29 I give to you a kingdom,
even as my Father has given a kingdom to me,
30 that you may eat and drink at my table in my
kingdom, and you will sit on thrones judging the
twelve tribes of Israel.
31 Simon, Simon, be aware, Satan asked to have
you, that he might sift you as wheat. 32 But I
have prayed for you, that your faith may not fail.
After you have turned back again, strengthen
your brothers.” 33 Peter said to him, “Lord, I
am ready to go with you both to prison and to
death.” 34 Jesus replied, “I tell you, Peter, the
rooster will not crow this day, before you deny
three times that you know me.”

Luke 22:35

lxxxiv

Luke 22:48

35 Then Jesus said to them, “When I sent you

out without a purse, a bag of provisions, or
shoes, did you lack anything?” They answered,
“Nothing.” 36 Then he said to them, “But now,
the one who has a purse, let him take it, and also
a bag of provisions. The one who does not have
a sword should sell his cloak and buy one. 37 For
I say to you, what is written about me must be
fulfilled, 'He was counted with the lawless ones.'
For what is predicted about me is being fulfilled.”
38 Then they said, “Lord, look! Here are two
swords.” He said to them, “It is enough.”
39 Jesus went, as he often did, to the Mount of
Olives, and the disciples followed him. 40 When

they arrived, he said to them, “Pray that you
41 He went
do not enter into temptation.”
away from them about a stone's throw, and
he knelt down and prayed, 42 saying, “Father,
if you are willing, remove this cup from me.
Nevertheless not my will, but yours be done.”
43 Then an angel from heaven appeared to him,
strengthening him. 44 Being in agony, he prayed
more earnestly, and his sweat became like great
drops of blood falling down upon the ground.
45 When he rose up from his prayer, he came to
the disciples, and found them sleeping because of
their sorrow, 46 and asked them, “Why are you
sleeping? Rise and pray, that you may not enter
into temptation.”
47 While he was still speaking, behold, a crowd

appeared, with Judas, one of the twelve, leading
them. He came near to Jesus to kiss him, 48 but

Luke 22:49

lxxxv

Luke 22:61

Jesus said to him, “Judas, are you betraying the
Son of Man with a kiss?” 49 When those who
were around Jesus saw what was happening,
they said, “Lord, should we strike with the
sword?” 50 Then one of them struck the servant
of the high priest, and cut off his right ear.
51 Jesus said, “That is enough!” He touched his
ear, and healed him. 52 Jesus said to the chief
priests, to the captains of the temple, and to
elders who came against him, “Do you come
out as against a robber, with swords and clubs?
53 When I was daily with you in the temple, you
did not lay your hands on me. But this is your
hour, and the authority of darkness.”
54 Seizing him, they led him away, and brought

him into the high priest's house. But Peter
followed from a distance. 55 After they had
kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and
had sat down together, Peter sat in the midst
of them. 56 A certain female servant saw him
as he sat in the light of the fire, and looked
straight at him and said, “This man also was with
him.” 57 But Peter denied it, saying, “Woman, I
do not know him.” 58 After a little while someone
else saw him, and said, “You are also one of
them.” But Peter said, “Man, I am not.” 59 After
about an hour another man insisted and said,
“Truly this man also was with him, for he is a
Galilean.” 60 But Peter said, “Man, I do not know
what you are saying.” Immediately, while he
was speaking, a rooster crowed. 61 Turning, the
Lord looked at Peter, and Peter remembered the
word of the Lord, when he said to him, “Before

Luke 22:62

lxxxvi

Luke 23:6

a rooster crows today you will deny me three
times.” 62 Peter went outside and wept bitterly.
63 Then the men guarding Jesus mocked and
beat him. 64 They put a cover over him and asked
him, saying, “Prophesy! Who is the one who hit
you?” 65 They spoke many other things against
Jesus, blaspheming him.
66 As soon as it was day, the elders of the people
gathered together, both chief priests and scribes.
They led him into the council 67 and said, “If you
are the Christ, tell us.” But he said to them, “If I
tell you, you will not believe, 68 and if I ask you,
you will not answer. 69 But from now on, the Son
of Man will be seated at the right hand of the
power of God.” 70 They all said, “Then you are
the Son of God?” Jesus said to them, “You say
that I am.” 71 They said, “Why do we still need a
witness? For we ourselves have heard from his
own mouth.”
1 The

23

whole company of them rose up and
brought Jesus before Pilate. 2 They began to
accuse him, saying, “We found this man perverting our nation, forbidding to give tribute to
Caesar, and saying that he himself is Christ, a
king.” 3 Pilate asked him, saying, “Are you the
King of the Jews?” Jesus answered him and said,
“You say so.” 4 Pilate said to the chief priests
and the multitudes, “I find no fault in this man.”
5 But they were insisting, saying, “He stirs up the
people, teaching throughout all Judea, beginning
from Galilee even to this place.” 6 So when

Luke 23:7

lxxxvii

Luke 23:19

Pilate heard this, he asked whether the man was
a Galilean. 7 When he discovered that he was
under Herod's authority, he sent Jesus to Herod,
who himself also was at Jerusalem in those days.
8 When Herod saw Jesus, he was very glad,
because he had wanted to see him for a long
time. He had heard about him and he hoped to
see some miracle done by him. 9 Herod questioned Jesus in many words, but Jesus answered
him nothing. 10 The chief priests and the scribes
stood, violently accusing him. 11 Herod with his
soldiers insulted Jesus and they mocked him.
Then they dressed him in elegant clothes and
sent him back to Pilate. 12 For Herod and Pilate
had become friends with each other that very
day, for before this they had been enemies with
each other.
13 Pilate then called together the chief priests
and the rulers and the crowd of people, 14 and
said to them, “You brought to me this man like a
man who is leading the people to act badly, and
see, I, having questioned him before you, find
no fault in this man concerning those things of
which you accuse him. 15 No, nor does Herod,
for he sent him back to us, and see, nothing
worthy of death has been done by him. 16 I will
therefore punish him, and release him.” 17 *
18 But they cried out all together, saying, “Away
with this man, and release to us Barabbas!”
19 Barabbas was a man who had been put into
* 23:17 The best ancient copies omit Luk. 23:17, Now Pilate was
obligated to release to the Jews one prisoner at the feast .

Luke 23:20

lxxxviii

Luke 23:33

prison for a certain rebellion in the city and for
murder. 20 Pilate addressed them again, desiring
to release Jesus. 21 But they shouted, saying,
“Crucify him, crucify him.” 22 He said to them a
third time, “Why, what evil has this man done? I
have found nothing deserving the death penalty
in him. Therefore after punishing him, I will
release him.” 23 But they were insistent with loud
voices, demanding for him to be crucified. Their
voices convinced Pilate. 24 So Pilate decided to
grant their demand. 25 He released the one they
asked for who had been put in prison for rioting
and murder. But he delivered up Jesus to their
will.
26 As they led him away, they seized one Simon
of Cyrene, coming from the country, and they
laid the cross on him to carry, following Jesus.
27 A great crowd of the people, and of women
who grieved and mourned for him, were following him. 28 But turning to them, Jesus said,
“Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me,
but weep for yourselves and for your children.
29 For see, the days are coming in which they will
say, 'Blessed are the barren and the wombs that
did not bear, and the breasts that did not nurse.'
30 Then they will begin to say to the mountains,
'Fall on us,' and to the hills, 'Cover us.' 31 For if
they do these things while the tree is green, what
will happen when it is dry?”
32 Other men, two criminals, were led away
with him to be put to death.
33 When they came to the place that is called
“The Skull,” there they crucified him, and the

Luke 23:34

lxxxix

Luke 23:48

criminals—one on his right and one on his left.
34 Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they
do not know what they are doing.” Then they
cast lots, dividing up his garments. 35 The
people stood watching while the rulers also were
mocking him, saying, “He saved others. Let
him save himself, if he is the Christ of God, the
chosen one.” 36 The soldiers also ridiculed him,
approaching him, offering him vinegar, 37 and
saying, “If you are the King of the Jews, save
yourself.” 38 There was also a sign over him,
“This is the King of the Jews.”
39 One of the criminals who was hanging there
insulted him by saying, “Are you not the Christ?
Save yourself and us.” 40 But the other rebuked
him, saying, “Do you not fear God, since you are
under the same sentence? 41 We indeed are here
justly, for we are receiving what we deserve for
our deeds. But this man did nothing wrong.”
42 Then he said, “Jesus, remember me when you
come into your kingdom.” 43 Jesus said to him,
“Truly I say to you, today you will be with me in
paradise.”
44 It was now about the sixth hour, and
darkness came over the whole land until the
ninth hour 45 as the sun's light failed. Then the
curtain of the temple was split in two. 46 Crying
with a loud voice, Jesus said, “Father, into your
hands I commit my spirit.” Having said this,
he died. 47 When the centurion saw what was
done, he glorified God, saying, “Surely this was
a righteous man.” 48 When all the multitudes
who came together to witness this sight saw the

Luke 23:49

xc

Luke 24:5

things that were done, they returned beating
their breasts. 49 But all those who knew him, and
the women who followed him from Galilee, stood
at a distance, watching these things.
50 Behold, there was a man named Joseph, who
was a member of the Council. He was a good and
righteous man. 51 This man had not agreed with
the decision of the Council and their action. He
was from the Judean town of Arimathea; and he
was looking for the kingdom of God. 52 This man,
approaching Pilate, asked for the body of Jesus.
53 He took it down, wrapped it in fine linen, and
placed it in a tomb that was cut in stone, where
no one had ever been laid. 54 It was the Day of
the Preparation, and the Sabbath was about to
begin. 55 The women who had come with Jesus
out of Galilee followed and saw the tomb and
how his body was laid. 56 They returned, and
prepared spices and ointments.
Then on the Sabbath they rested according to
the commandment.

24

1 Very early on the first day of the week, they

came to the tomb, bringing the spices which they
had prepared. 2 They found the stone rolled
away from the tomb. 3 They entered in, but
did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. 4 It
happened that, while they were confused about
this, suddenly, two men stood by them in bright
shining robes. 5 As the women were filled with
fear and bowed down their faces to the earth,
they said to the women, “Why do you seek the

Luke 24:6

xci

Luke 24:19

living among the dead? 6 He is not here, but has
been raised! Remember how he spoke to you
when he was still in Galilee, 7 saying that the Son
of Man must be delivered up into the hands of
sinful men and be crucified, and on the third
day rise again.” 8 The women remembered his
words, 9 and returned from the tomb, and told all
these things to the eleven and all the rest. 10 Now
Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of
James, and the other women with them reported
these things to the apostles. 11 But this message
seemed like idle talk to the apostles, and they
did not believe the women. 12 Yet Peter rose up
and ran to the tomb, and stooping and looking
in, he saw the linen cloths by themselves. Peter
then departed to his home, wondering what had
happened.
13 Behold, two of them were going that very

day to a village named Emmaus, which was
sixty stadia from Jerusalem. 14 They discussed
with each other about all the things that had
15 It happened that, while they
happened.
discussed and questioned together, Jesus himself approached and went with them. 16 But
their eyes were prevented from recognizing him.
17 Jesus said to them, “What are the two of you
talking about as you walk?” They stood there
looking sad. 18 One of them, named Cleopas,
answered him, “Are you the only person in
Jerusalem who does not know the things which
have happened there these days?” 19 Jesus said
to them, “What things?” They answered him,

Luke 24:20

xcii

Luke 24:32

“The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene, who
was a prophet, mighty in deed and word before
God and all the people, 20 and how the chief
priests and our rulers delivered him up to be
condemned to death and crucified him. 21 But
we had confidence that he was the one who
was going to redeem Israel. Yes, and what is
more, it is now the third day since all these
things happened. 22 But also, some women of
our company amazed us, having been at the
tomb early in the morning. 23 When they did
not find his body, they came, saying that they
had also seen a vision of angels who said that
he was alive. 24 Some men who were with
us went to the tomb, and found it just as the
women had said. But they did not see him.”
25 Jesus said to them, “O foolish men and slow
of heart to believe in all that the prophets have
spoken! 26 Was it not necessary for the Christ
to suffer these things, and to enter into his
glory?” 27 Then beginning from Moses and
through all the prophets, Jesus interpreted to
them the things concerning himself in all the
scriptures. 28 As they approached the village to
which they were going, Jesus acted as though he
were going further. 29 But they compelled him,
saying, “Stay with us, for it is toward evening
and the day is almost over.” So Jesus went in to
stay with them. 30 It happened that, when he had
sat down with them to eat, he took the bread,
blessed it, and breaking it, he gave it to them.
31 Then their eyes were opened, and they knew
him, and he vanished out of their sight. 32 They

Luke 24:33

xciii

Luke 24:47

said one to another, “Was not our heart burning
within us, while he spoke to us on the way, while
he opened to us the scriptures?” 33 They rose up
that very hour, and returned to Jerusalem. They
found the eleven gathered together, and those
who were with them, 34 saying, “The Lord is risen
indeed, and has appeared to Simon.” 35 So they
told the things that happened on the way, and
how Jesus was shown to them in the breaking of
the bread.
36 As they spoke these things, Jesus himself
stood in the midst of them, and said to them,
“Peace be to you.” 37 But they were terrified
and filled with fear, and supposed that they saw
a spirit. 38 Jesus said to them, “Why are you
troubled? Why do questions arise in your heart?
39 See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself.
Touch me and see. For a spirit does not have
flesh and bones, as you see me having.” 40 When
he had said this, he showed them his hands and
his feet. 41 They still could not believe it because
of joy, and they were amazed. Jesus said to them,
“Do you have anything to eat?” 42 They gave him
a piece of a broiled fish, 43 and he took it and ate
it before them.
44 He said to them, “When I was with you, I
told you that all that was written in the Law of
Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must
be fulfilled.” 45 Then he opened their minds,
that they might understand the scriptures. 46 He
said to them, “Thus it is written, that the Christ
should suffer, and rise again from the dead on
the third day. 47 Repentance and forgiveness of

Luke 24:48

xciv

Luke 24:53

sins should be preached in his name to all the
nations, beginning from Jerusalem. 48 You are
witnesses of these things. 49 See, I am sending
you what my Father promised. But remain in
the city until you are clothed with power from
on high.”
50 Then Jesus led them out until they were
near Bethany.
He lifted up his hands and
51
blessed them.
It happened that, while he was
blessing them, he left them and was carried up
into heaven. 52 So they worshiped him, and
returned to Jerusalem with great joy. 53 They
were continually in the temple, blessing God.

xcv

Unlocked Literal Bible

The Holy Bible in English, Unlocked Literal Bible
translation
copyright © 2017 Door43 World Missions Community
Language: English
Translation by: Door43 World Missions Community
Contributor: 'Alrick G. Headley, M.Div., Th.M.', 'Adam W. Nagelvoort,
M.Div. Academic Ministries, Columbia International University', 'Dave
Statezni, BA Orig langs., M.Div. Fuller Theological Seminary', 'Bram van
den Heuvel, M.A.', 'C. Harry Harriss, M.Div.', 'David Trombold, M. Div.',
'Elizabeth Oakes, BA in Religious Studies, Linguistics', 'George "Drew"
Curley, M.Div., PhD, Professor of Biblical Languages', Hendrik "Henry" de
Vries, 'Henry Whitney, BA Linguistics', 'Jesse Griffin, BA Biblical Studies,
MA Biblical Languages', 'James N. Pohlig, M.Div., MA in Linguistics,
D. Litt. in Biblical Languages', 'Larry T Brooks, M.Div., Assemblies of
God Theological Seminary', 'Larry Sallee, D.Min.', 'Paul M Fahnestock,
M.Div. Reformed Theological Seminary, D. Min. Pittsburgh Theological
Seminary', 'Perry Oakes, PhD in Old Testament, MA in Linguistics', 'Peter
Smircich, BA Philosophy', 'Susan Quigley, MA in Linguistics', 'Thomas
Warren, M.Div., Trinity Evangelical Divinity School, D.Min, Reformed
Theological Seminary', 'Timothy Neu, Ph.D. Biblical Studies', 'Ward Pyles,
M.Div., Western Baptist Theological Seminary', David Trombold, Dean
Ropp, Gene Mullen, James Vigen, Leonard Smith, Nicholas Alsop, Michael
Francis
This is an open-licensed update of the ASV, intended to provide a 'formcentric' understanding of the Bible. It increases the translator's understanding of the lexical and grammatical composition of the underlying
text by adhering closely to the word order and structure of the originals.
This translation is made available to you under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Share-Alike license 4.0.
You have permission to share and redistribute this Bible translation in
any format and to make reasonable revisions and adaptations of this
translation, provided that:
You include the above copyright and source information.
If you make any changes to the text, you must indicate that you did
so in a way that makes it clear that the original licensor is not
necessarily endorsing your changes.

xcvi
If you redistribute this text, you must distribute your contributions
under the same license as the original.
Pictures included with Scriptures and other documents on this site are
licensed just for use with those Scriptures and documents. For other uses,
please contact the respective copyright owners.
Note that in addition to the rules above, revising and adapting God's Word
involves a great responsibility to be true to God's Word. See Revelation
22:18-19.
2020-12-04
PDF generated using Haiola and XeLaTeX on 3 Mar 2023 from source files
dated 22 Nov 2019
d2521e10-6da3-5d98-a991-da7d3515afd5

